
--- Page 1 ---
Toa 10069- 10260 ml 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 / of Y a

. yr . No-1 72-55

3 :

chi

: ton

Chief, Mew Grieans Office

The ti-formation Councit of the Americas, 620 Gravier Street,
Hew Orleans, Louisiana 70130

Ref.

we

NO-152-65, Support Branch (Richardson) memo of 28 April 1965, C38

pon ff LBS
Sg wh PP DGS
1. The Information Council of the Americas (INCA) Of 620 Gravier Street, -
New Orleans, Louistana, was recently opened as a source of foreign Intelligence
information on the radio broadcasting industry in Latin America, The current
program of INCA is primarily concerned with the dissemination of taped record~
ings of anti-Communist material, called Truth Tapes, to certain radio broad-
casting stations in Latin America and North America for use as a weapon against
Communist penetration in the Americas. tts headquarters are located at 620
Gravier Street, Hew Orleans, Louisiana 70130. You will find the names of its.
officers, directors, and consultants given on the enclosed letterhead of the.

organi zation.
A J2L:HYO

2. We have been in recent contact with Edward ScannelV Butler, Executive
Vice President and Staff Director, and have received his assurances of. whole-
hearted cooperation in our agency's mission. [Yesterday we examined all of the
files ‘of correspondence between Hr. Butler and personne! of various radio-

tations in 16 Latin American count ries.| tn order to build up a market for

the Truth Tapes program in Latin America, Mr. Butler first obtained from the
appropriate consul in New Orleans a list of the radio stations in operation in
his country. He next wrote the administrative personnel of these stations
about the anti-Communist purpose of INCA and offered to supply each station
with Truth Tapes. Those stations requesting them were then provided with a
series of the tapes. One or two years later, Mr. Sutter sent the participating
station a questionnaire designed to elicit information. about audience response
to the Truth Tapes program. Copies of the first questionnaire and of a revised
one are attached for your information. Judging by the responses we read, the
{NCA correspondence files will provide a limited amount of information; dated
i304 aad 1555, an the identification of radio stations in Latin America which
are broadcasting Truth Tapes, their addresses, the names of key personnel, the
identification of stations not responding to the INCA offer, sizes of audiences,
and their responses. Ja the case gf Uruguay, the exchange of correspondence
between/Nr, Gutler and for. Martin Mi queo-Narancio fontained information abaut
the political orientation OF 8S y personnel“tn Montevideo /HO-TCH7E/.
This example, however, is an exception, ce the files contain virtually ro

detatled political information of stqnifi

Cory

RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Onty
Do Net Reproduce’

( ay ORs74dsS


--- Page 2 ---
toned yesterday that, tna
Id welecoae r pyestions avout addittonsal topics.
C stions designed to elicié technical information about ‘the station
and its equipment, such as descriptions (manufacturer, type, model) of trans~
mitter, receiver, antenna type and power, frequencies and frequency range, reli-
ability of cquipment, normal? and emeryency power sources, remote pick-up arrange-
ments, etc. We stressed of course that none of these topics should be introduced
into the questionnaire unless Mre Butler was convinced of their suitability for
his immediate purpose as well as for the long-term propaganda aim of his organi-
zation. He stated that our suzgestions were entirely proser and, in his opinion,
were reasonable requests that would not arouse the station manager's curiosity.
We pointed out to Mr. Butler that, while Informationfabout key personnel and —
their political orientationy) about the station's adainistrative policies, etc.,
was of prime importance to us, these subjects obviously could not be introduced
‘into the questfonnaire. He agreed that it would be better to elicit such infor~
mation in another manner, as he kad done with(Or. Miqueo-Narancio,Pbut because
of his very heavy responsibilities, he did not Rava time-to-devefop similar
‘sources of information in each of the other 15 countries.

4, tt occurs to us that you or a possible consumer could assist us by
; suggesting other appropriate topics for Mr. Butler's consideration in the revision
wt of the questionnaire. We shal! appreciate whatever help you can glve us In this
regard.

5. in the meantime, as soon as all of Mr. Butler's current correspondence
been properly filed, we expect ta extract the appropriate information froma

hes
the folders and to present the material in a series of 00-B reports

LLOYD AL RAY

DABrandao/gn
Enclosures

cc: Services Branch


