
--- Page 1 ---
14-p0000
104-10169-10139} | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |

‘
‘ e
»

TT dagen



--- Page 2 ---
(1) UNCLASSIFIEO |g
rs en

H

, al
: a
EP SGRERR OEMs :
fi PLES SeeBBBBEeR, .
gh BEE a:
oO s ,
va

610 “ere
EL able abtaba

toe
"|, OK 86



--- Page 3 ---
1400008

ii aad a a a

i) vacasssren Cj fsetnal ~ + 0) CONFD -eriat A) SECRET

1

a ‘ :

: oa ;

i ‘ 4

5 i ;
nr }
i

==
leer anal Laat)

aele__fs_ biota

ace d
ae
y

oS: 5 eggs 088 rng ht

apgrceka are Mbon got,
. ponte ge ae :

| oe AF ies Dex.

Tits Trae

oar 0 UNCLASSIFIED

EMT PRINT OFFICK: 1908 O -4707H1 |

EA Secret =] CONFIDENTIAL «(7 URTEMAL
AE eth RENE SE teed thebi tbe. Oa Ok GONERIMM



--- Page 4 ---
14-0000

To Chief, Ee i: Fatthew [. CARS

0 Cnief, sh (ATTN: Zherman G. CUSICK)
. Chief, > (ATTN: Leonaru ¥. SACKETT)

can a
31 Jemuary 1962

RE "43.3" — CHECK “I ONE)
MARKED FOR INDGUNG
NO _INDOUNG REQUIRED

1. 1 suggest that the story of ASLADLE, fram the aonent he walked into the
home: of Martin A. KOODINE untis be ues safely under alisha custody in tne Laited
States, deserves compiling, analysis, sad publication in the fors of an Gperae-.
tlomal Ald. It richly 1ilustrates the aeay probless «nich aust and oan be cure
mounted, and could be nighiy instructive to Culerfs uf Station ia all camtries
shere tue o:xt Soviet aefcctor aignt appear.

“2. Here ie the Frankfurt contribution (written at ay request) to such @
Compilation: a cliffhanger from atart to fialan, but also eo svomentary on tne
mary types of probleas which can arise, and tne fect tit..2t taxes hard scork-aod ~~
GkiL1ful Laprovisation to salve thes. 1t wae a cliffnanger botn before and after
the Frenkfurt chapter (1 nominate MOUDIMNE for @ modal for his part) and ougnt to
eake excellent reading.

od . . | .

, de Phe handling|of defectors obviously te not # new responsibility to tiie
German Station, The (Chaczons facility which oxiste priaarily for the receipt, .
estanliancent of bona fides, dodriefing, and resettiasont of defectors hes exiatod
here for the last decade. Sor is the auvenent by. blacn.cracuation-of-cperational: -
personnel a unique task for us t: perform. We have @cvenpiiehed this many tines
by use of cur.ow, intograted WUNIT facility and also by the furnicning of alias
Gcounentation to the person of interest and A@cconplisning the transport via
acheduled MATS flights. The simificont points which aade tne ARLADLE case unique .
@Ay never again in their entirety be duplicated but in part they eny well be,
ané therefore should bo cnumerated: .

. a. A Soviet diplomt, and nexber of the KIS, stationed in a none
_ Satellite but politically senaitive country, whien at tho tice cs ABLADIE's
Gofeotion was wider considerable Soviet pressure. :

b. Tne fact that the actual atroumtanses uoncermias hic -:t of ,
‘defection were such thst an imedicts decision by tha am on tue scene nad
to bo made to take advantage of the opportunity.

©. The fact that little alterzative could be given, under the facts
as described in (a) above, excapt to believe the defeator's statements
Gad soquiesce in his demmnda, i.o., he possessed information of a significant
and perishable nature and vould disvlose it conpletsly only upoa arrival in
the United States. a :

a. The fact that ance the commitments in (c) above wore wade every
weasonable effort hed to be made to acocumodate the defector'’s demand.

; ©. in order to accomplish all this an untried method of evacuation, £
black evacuation via coameroial aircraft had to be accomplished in order to
suocessfully procead with the undertaking, , .

4. A retrospective analysis as to how this case commenced, and the uaique
” festers connected with it as snussrated above, lead ee to suggest for Headquarters
otudy-what I refer to as “:indings” end “areas of study,” hat 1 have leteles as
“rindings® in effect renrereent facts uhich, Lf mot aru Git, yuite probably sould
have deprived us in uurmany of particlpeting Swessstully in tho sovement of the
ARLADIS family, The “areas of atudy,” on the other hand, repreaent either anseere
able questions or matters in areas wneroin operational disgussions may well take
place to noo if same tyne of achool-buok solution can be devised. .

5. Iwill elaborate bulow, where appropriate, on some of these “findings” but |
will firet record thent BO ; Sein, POUT

ee ee hale

=

|

Pes
8Y QUALIRED HQ. DESK ONLY



--- Page 5 ---
14-0000

° ’ Tabse ean y Te wate habe ane
CONTINUATION OF F

OISPATCH \ BosT-lsa, Ai Jamary 12

8. Tre eiedom of AMAR opintainicg in tue European area at least ane ‘ield
installation having ossignec to it persunnel representing tie wany ¢sapetencies
Becessary 1.9 tie intelligence ume-taking :a5 been recu. firmed.

9. The «tacos of ottaining appropriate security cieuances, and having
Stations orief and mase =:tting cf at least an AiS contact, tio resident senior
United States citizen porsvanel of Unites States flag air ca-riers operating
witnin any Station's area. :

c. The fallacy of depending on marg.oal or obsolescenxt eculpasnt to
accomplish sensitive tessa of nign priority. we here refer to l7-year C->4 aire
creatt,

a. A realizaticn that a retio esists cetecen the nuater of pple ande

@vare of & given watertaking in rolation to tne obstacles encountered in success~

fully accomp.ianing tat tndertak:ng. .
6. A few words of elaberation are in order on tne four Prunesding polate.
Because the initial endeavor at clack evacuation lg AUoAKA alresait avortad, we sere
given an opportunity to see with gremt clar:ty tne apviloation of t:ese potmts. If
tre attempt to evacuate by AlushK-sasigned aircraft bad bven aucceacful, teen
knovledge of the defection could nave been inwid to approximteiy elt staff and
Qseigned ailitary personne]. Secause that emicaver u.as unsuccesetul, at least nine
G@dditianal etarf and a: 1itary pereonnel..became-gunesally us specifically avare of the
a@atter, plus tne Consul General and one of his senior ufficers. Additionally one
private luited States citizen, tne senior Pan Amerioan official in rreakfurt, became
very much. aeare of tnis sensitive case. This ingrease im te nusoer of iadviduale
come avout ef an immediate nosed jate in te evening of Saturday, 16 Decenber,
to use two(CA RZ etatfers to assiat in the aafencusing fimstion, a tutal of six
WRTOPAZ ateffora (doewnentation, graphics, photagraphic) to prepare and issue.
Crauuleat end alies passpurts, and an sosigned eniiated man to act as @ eafencuse
Quer. The Cunsulate Venere) imd to affix visas to tue fraudulent passports. - Tne
@ost erucial tadividual involved; However, wea the Pan American official wo to @

“Certain degree put his position in Jeopardy by being es cooperative on the aatter isa.

he wae... Witnout previously-having ¢losrod.and briefed this official. {die sountere
part in TeA is elec eo cleared and briefed) the «:ole undertaking would nave beon
presluded. It would Lave Leen iapoasible to asconpliah departure without doousentae
tion.on @ commercial aircreft. cithout the connivance of the commercial airjine .
involved. Indeed with ausn cunnivance it was difficult and finky onough. Pinaliy,
the point conowrning cbnolcacent equipment speaks for iteeif. licadquarters ts fuluy
@uare of the feelings of this Station concerning the inadeyuscy for cur purposes

of assigned atroreft. Suffice it to say that «hen defectors apparently of eianifie
cant valuo refune te ride such aircraft *.. eatter merita thorovg:. sticty.

7. The matter of “aroas of stuiy" appears to us to cuconpass at least tie
follortes: . 7
@. Average tive differences in transmitting Aig precoJonce ¢
gQommmtentions between 3: pics of ita
Girewits vita at
quarters. It affords ua a ftmoility for instentanevus ccsmmication. a oun
g@ake cortain rough eatisates aa to hos long it might take sparcerinte Leade
Q@uartera officials Co aNewer our queries and wo can then approxinasts the
errival time of answera to high precedence traffic, Olner Stations, however,
do not have KN-26 equipment, all do not nave the same type of oryptological
' @quipment, and there 1a a different pattern as to the type of ciroultry, 1.06,
Girect leased linaa. tux, etratent comercial servies, cto. wa-belicve thers
fe merit tn the appropriate Headquarters unli @aleavoring to group geogripiie.
Joally Stations end tien based on-the type cf oununlvations amd eryptuloyiaal
equipment and the channel of trennmiasion to co@e up with predictions ag to
the average lengta of time tne tronsalesion of a priority or operational
" femediate cable vould take pet«cen and among the varivun representative
groupings, In the case under. study, wialoh represented # rather fast-breaking
‘eituation, 2% ses not poussibis for tia to salioatie the./i of tice 1% took
to transmit an operaticuel iomediate cable petesan(s Jand Frankiuit.
Te Wonks Have cecn of vaiue to ue to nove had sone Lues a thie satier.
&. Cugiiinatiug vetween U5. Air Atteuhog and CUS, we valleve it would
Be worttwhile to cequest each Chief of Statiuiin a location snore tho Air.

10m SE PREVIOUS EDITION. s PAQE ND.

’
QEPLACES FORMS SROKREBRE

I EH
: : . _ . .


--- Page 6 ---
14-0000

nes err e hin COP RICM So Bo Oo ee . .
CONTINUATION OF igupcRrE® : . dL.
DISPATCH RY BAT “| RuU-14004, 51 January 1962

Poree or Navy has an essigned attache plane to establish procedures whereby the
Air or Maval Attache «ill advise COS of ony. absenos of the attaone plane, the
point of designation of tne alroreft, and the duration of the absense. ‘Tnere
have been previous defections unsere attache planes sere ‘used 5 fhe initial
vehicle of black evacwtion. In tno evacwitian plan of [seecrjeor ABLADLE,
they informed us by cable that. they proposal to use, the attache plans, te are
of the opinion that shen the statasont «os cade (St oknc ja )nade the assunption.
the plane was imediately availsole. As unas is! dlacevared ua the
particular plons in questi ot Kiesbaden and not tibd tia: This, however,
was somo 61x hours after Gtildidinjatated its intent to use that aircraft.
While in thin particular sattors eventually worked cut successfully the
story aignt be otherzise in 4 diff-rent set of facts.

@. Priority furetaning of traces. when a Station is alerted to a request
to renter operational support to tne noveasnt of a defector and simultaneously
onewers & request in the negative if it can furnish traces, the following
Procedure is worthy of studs. if Headquarters pussesses, and tine permits, wa
believe 1¢ worth=nile to foreard an invediate summry to the Station rendering
support if the backgrowad of the de‘scter is much that it would be a catter of
local interest. This «culd have been the case in AZLADLE. As suboequent bead
Guartera debriefing developed (and we assumed it sould have :cen disclosed in

¢ Seadquarters traces) AKIADLE had

UME PREVIOUS EDITION,

AFMLACES PORE ECR?

490-78, 41-280 AND 51-99 ‘ remteuID



--- Page 7 ---
14-0000

Se cS Eewienss soentre pierrenr tee weer see gate ote ee pene a re a

"

- SUBJECT: ; Handling at German Station 16 and 17 December of.

. for ineecicte dsparturs of ine. family for the
G@rrengesente to have a C-54 with aAugmen’

:, Removed and a false number put on the alroraft. Conrad V. LAPOLLA
. (Acting Chief. COS/XMUSODA) was contacted @nd ask2d to come to the office

eapability to act as escort,

#~ TO Ba0r-14004, 31 Jan 1962

18 December 1961

NEMGRANDUN FOR: ‘The Record

Soviet Defector from Russian Embassy at Helsinki

1. This memorandum is designed to record, soon after the event,

all facts pertaining tu the handling within the German Station of the
evacuation of a Soviet Vice Covnsa) (and-member of the RIS) from _
Russian Bubesay at Helsinki. ‘At the time of this writing there 1a

etill lacking certain information to complete the entire story. Home.
ever, 1t ie felt worthwhile to record all events while. the memory ia

still fresh. In the following paragraphs the defector is referred to

as “subject” and pseudonyms and: identities are used in all other cases.

2, At approximately 0730 houre Saturday, 16 Deceaber, Arnold ae

and asked:me. to procesd- =
immediately to the residence of Joel D. RENTHAM (Chief of Station).

SENTHAM _ LYACK briefed me..on ......
the [Stookndinjoable which asnounsed Stade’ al'intent. te endeavor to
fly Subject and femily “black” from[Stobinolm|to Frankfurt aboard the
Air Attache aircraft. Cable aleo r

oraft available to receive immediately subject and family and take oft
forthwith to the ber teh ten,

en: States. LYACK also mentioned an. IN cable froa
DIR which requested(Stiskficli) to move family soonest to(CRBeZ0NR in
Prenkfurt 2

for establishment of bona fides, oO.

en_adjourned to the offices and awaited more word from
Kiolm,) which would advise on the arrival. ting.
or'from Headquarters conourring in|Stod
United States upon.
@rrivai at Frankfurt. EAQB was immediately alerted and they made

, ted crew prepared to depart for
the United States by 1200 hours. A compartment for the subject's —
family was put in the C-54 and the regularly assigned tail number was

immediately. Disoussions were then held with LYACK and Carl T, UPDILL
@6 to the availability of a KUDOVE oase officer with hussian language



--- Page 8 ---
14-0000

|
| _ NS: Beomledge whether or not a KUDOVE officer from either Helsinki or

i
|
"Sime, had gone to Rhein/Main Airport to meet an
|
1
!
4
bs

Gernazy was Prepared to receive and effect immediate black evacuation
Of the family to tne United States. In the meantime, it had been
that IDENTITY A would be used as the seourity escort and
Pamsel K. HUCHANE (AD/FI Staff) would be on standby to serve as a
EIDWE escort. This was a contingane:

(Cirocknoln}uas prepared to travel with subject all the way to Washing~

5. Around 1100 hours 1 Ssked Edvard P. TOCHENSKY (Chief; EAca)
» So establish contact with the Wiesbaden Air ays. *ower and

Air Attache plane.-
Tals ets done decause we have had previous instances of "black™

arrivals at Wiesbaden where the aircraft actually arrived before ‘the
BRA cable from (tha Sock,

lay on

At about 1130 we cabled thia information to/Stockhola}'/ [<3
end DIR and Pyrat to dispatch an atrorart to Copenhagen to make” —

tdokholm/eould move the body there. Because of =
eal diffioulties involving air clearances and ‘lengths of runways,
WS could not imeetlately get into any field north of Copenhagen.

on from Wiesbaden by BAOB
of subject's family upon arrival, If auch could not be

Grranged we were then requested to hold subject and family at Charon.
: SIMS oye
T%. Having heard nothing trom (atookhe

: ig) by Spprus:mately 1600
"| hours: ve @gain sent them oPIM traffic asking that they inforn us
: + Ihad previously left the office
@rout 14350 hours in onder to get some limeh end +
tes Fersonsl items. Y hea c8lled Nelson'k. POLIAKOFP (Deputy for
. Administration Staff) in to a c
: current situation, when I returned at 1600 hours MUCHANE had
: Caue into the office crapared for the trip. We then sent the above-
.. wantioned cable and surzssted that MUCHANE return to his quartera and
euait further developments. I Phoned TOCHENSKY and Suggested that he
° amd his comunisator returm to- their quarters. LAPOLLA, in the mean-

inooming ataffer oarry-

one. iie then returned
r Watch Officer that

. ‘ing classified material and get him through Cust
' , to hfe home, 1 lett word with the Signal. Cente
@ay incoming traffic on subject's irip should
to LAPOLIA who vould sous in

4
ee

be telephoned samediately
» review the traffic and contact me. The



--- Page 9 ---
14-0000

Watch Officer was also asked to, impediately phon: the Wiesbaden Com- ,

municator who in turn would contact TOCHENSKY and both of them would
GO to their office.

8. At approximately 1900 hours LAFOLLA contacted me at home
the Signal. nter_and informed me that an Kit
in fron (Stodkh

“told LAPOLLA not to“Blert MUCHANE

: ec ed. gue -Sergeant to buy certain
 Wypes of foods aiid magazines that/Stodkioliajasked to be put aboard the
United States-bound aircraft, we contacted TOCHENSKY

and ascertained
that EAOB was in a state of lomediate readiness, David ii. MULPALL

g
E
g
z
[
i
2
3
7
E
3
o
8
Hi
i=
f
a
5

9. I then proceeded to the home of Ronald M. CORBANE (COS Lawyer)
we were guests for dinner. At approximately hours I received
& call froe LAPOLLA that Subject-and family had arrived, the turnover

- Was made, and that the ZAOS aircraft was airborne at ®pproximately 2150
houre. I telephoned this information to BENTHAM,

i@ Signal
ing message from the
i. was

sick passenger, Iasaedie
who was at the quarters

L\POLIA atated that he
” bad gotten hold of the Air Base Plight Surgeon and was proceading to

the Air Base. He krew at thet time ne other detaile. I told kim Ches¢sr
B. FAGERUDD (C09 Boston) Officer) and mysolf would leave immediately -
' for Wiesbaden Air Base, ‘

ll. FAGERUUND was in attendance at the senc dinner party and we
departed iomediately for the Air Base. Upon arrival at approxinately
. 8500 hours the EAOB atroraft had Qlreedy lanied ard xeximia ‘weourity
' provisions were observed in: the Srea. Air Polise had the “Hangar 34

Avon” blocked off two blocks in either direction,

. 12. TOCHENSKY met me outside the bullding snd informed ma tree

* Ammodiately after toxc-orf subject's cix-year-old daughter had besome
Rtremsly eirsick and suffered respirstory diffioulties, She vas

- administores oxygen. Tho mo:her beoane hyeterica) and the father
demanded that the atroratt immediately be returned to ita point of



--- Page 10 ---
14-0000

\ rangements. KOODINE took me aside
and strenuously iopressed me with the foct that subject was of the
opinion that certain of his informati

@ in ose we should need it. I immediately =
was no anawer, I then phoned

& Contact Stephan R, LACKLEN
Ga immediate need to house & :
WUSARK officers at Eschborn,
be standing by at Opel Cirole
Honeywell Building at 019) &:
enother vehiele to 23; LOOT As

opposite the Minneapolis |
CUTE G8 Se prepared to excort

Phone BSYTHAM and

tell hia we wouldidron by his house
dater thas oy

Ging to brief hin on any developments,

e
December and arrty,

"IND ioaero epccrvettemanoai eet erste: perme nh sonmea mrt ane


--- Page 11 ---
14-0000

5

15. BENTHAM «ss then fully briefed on developments and ROODINE
gave certain operational inforwation of a sensitive nature from subject
to BENTHAM. After necessary analysis and discussion the following
Geciaions were reached: : cata ae

@. . We would endeavor to remove the family out of Prankfurt

b. In the absence of the ability to accomplish thie, we would
@ndeavor to renove them on an Air Force Medical Kveountion
Plight on Monday, 13 Deceaber,

@. S2seph Q. KLUCK (Chief, COG/KURIOT) was contacted by
phone from HENTHAM's residence and said he. believed that
his people could affix in the subject's passports &
Vederal Kopublio entry ataap, This was considered fecea-
sary in order to provent embarrassing questions by German .
Aammigration Authoritios on Sunday when the family would
Gepart by commercial air. . Tne family had entered the .
Federal Kepublio “black” and accordingly there was no .
entry pormit in their Soviet Diplomatio passports.

“4s ‘We would return LAPOLA and ROODINE-to the safe-nouse and~””
I woi.td aloo send cut one enlisted guard with sidearm,

‘information and everyone departed the KENTHAN reaidenge for their
Respective missions. I proveeded to the Signal Conter and reloased the
érafted cable.

1. 3%. arrived back at my quarters about 0330 hours. At about 0410
hours I roceived a call from KLEMACK, wanting to get in touch with .
LAPOLLA on matters pertaining to the documentation work he was trying

to accomlisn. I gave him the telephone nunber of the Esohborn safe=
house. . It turned out that the cold weather had affeoted telephone come ©
mamioations to Keehhorn and the rhone vss 4 HIZHACK Uhen went oa

_ *@ Bachborn and discussed his probisa with LAPOLLA and KOUDINE. I an

. 4nformed, but as yet do not know tie teamnioal reason why, that KURIOT

Yt was decided at the meeting at the Ksohborn safe-house that KURIOT

would try to make and have ready by tle next torning[Austrian] passporte
. for aubjeot and hie family. . :

18. At about 0600 hours I received a call from the Signal Center
Watch Officer informing me that Headquarters “approved your plan,” 2
armediately tried to contact the Eschborn safe-house by phone but to no
avanti. Arocunt 0630 I contacted KLUHACK at the Aiur installation and
was then informed by him of hig earlier visit to Eschborn around 0400,
Re told me during his phone conversation that LAPOLLA was going to get
up about 0700 hours. I surmised that LAPOLLA would proceed immediately
to the office and then did so myself, ; ., ,

by commercial aircraft that day, 1.e., Sunday, 17 Deceaber. 7

* 46. A cable to Headquarters was drafted on the basis of all this.

-: @Gaid not put in the subject's passport the required German entry stam. .



--- Page 12 ---
1400000

6

dos 7. 29. LAPOLZA arrived at tne office sametiee shortly after 0800. “‘e
2 then discussed wnat cur possibilities were, based on tne situation as
. : we then saw it. we i passports would

nad no guarantee that the[austhiad]
be finisned Sy AURIOT in time to ve used by an carly afternoon United .
States flag cocpercial Jet. We discussed again, as we had the previous
evening, contacting Mr. william Naylor,-the Pan Amerioan Senior orfleer
tn Germany and a cleared and witting contact, as to whether or not he
ould arrange to board Dassengers without going through German inmnigra-
tion, t.e., Passport Control. The question of the Availability of seats
was also involved. LAPOLLA Suggested that we phone Naylor in his
Fesidence in Had Homburg and explain to him we had a @atter of serious
tirgenoy and ask him-to Come imvediately to the I.¢. Parben Building and
/-, ddBouse the matter with us. The phone call was made and Naylor agreed
: So . €@ do this. LAPOLLA then Contasted the MATS Office a

¥

4

ould be sent on the flignt. Inasmuch as
@ C-155 is tho military cargo vereion of. a. Boeing .797,-LAPOLLA and ayeelr -
dieorv»ned seriously the advisa get military

of woomplinen
. being afforded,

#0. Noylor arrived at the office at about
@@Mereally aware of our probles.

lures and we had no guarantee
‘umentation by flight departure time ‘of
We then asked him what he considered to ix
: of working out. a presedura to Doard the party "olaok”
. Bixd to provent any aivulgenos Cf their existenoe to the German Inmigras
tion Authorities. Arter Coneiderable digoussion it appeared that there

‘ oa

wrt
eet ae

Ther



--- Page 13 ---
14-0000

existed & very good possibility to get. ths passengers aboard the aire
oraft and successfully circumvent German passport controle. Naylor
contacted his own assistant am the PAA Operations Officer assigned to
Rhein/Main, both of wnom are United States citizens, and asked that
they proceed to the airport and stand by to assist him in tne handling
of sowe very important personages ic wore departing on PAA No. 73,

He then ascertained that only three first class seats were available -
om this flight. He told his assistant to soat two passengers in the ©
@ircraft lounge and he would accept full responsioility for it. This
1o Somewhat touchy in the eirlinea business as lounge seats have no .
@afety belte., He aleo knew additional first olass. seats were available. 9 -- «—
out of London. :

21. In the weantine, XLAMACK and one of his gen working on the
@oounentation had returned to Eschborn to take pictures of subject and
Bis family that would be necessary for the(husttrtaay pusaports. ° The
, West reading we could get froa the KURIOT people wWorking.on the doous.

wents was that they would not be ready on time. Inasmuch as decisions
bad been made, we decided tc set the wheels in motica and started the
. family to the airport. LAPOLLA accordingly took off for Eschborn and

“@ plan was agreed upon where ho would arrive with the family in front

Of the Rhein/Main Departure Building et 1230 hours. Naylor would be’ .
atanding by the entrance and take the family via a cirauitous atrport
building route to the PAA Operations Office which 1@ located on the
“second floor of the building beyond Passport Control. Naylor departed
St about the same time as LAPOLLA and went dircotly to the airport.

. 22. Earlier in the morning I had asked BENTHAM if he could effect
' arrangements at the Consulato to have a Vieo Officer standing to put
United States vieitors' visas for subject's family inthe (usthiss)pass= oh
porte. BaccSHAM accomplished this and, at Naylor's suggestion, we asked | af ‘
if the Consulate Officer could go tothe PAA Operations Gffice at Rhein/ .
Mair, and sten4 by there to accomplish his visa werk. Bz 66 Going we -
could Sivs spprocimately 50 ainutes time. 1 contacted Mr. Rollie White
~, Of the Consulate office and he agreed to mest us at the airport at.
- 42455 houre. : Looe

. 23. I next phoned BENTHAM ond made hie. avare-of our situation. It
. Gid not look as if we would have any useble documentation to pass. the
fanily and would have to take ti:o chance of wircurenting the Passport
Control. Our principal concern was that a Geruan Innigration Officer
would be a*<anding by the aircraft doparture area and «ould ask to see
Subjeot's passport. wo could not Ret nubject's family aboard the

2 Fegular bua that gees from ine deparvure building to the alroraft

. because there was no way we could get them to the bus loading area
Without going thro:.zh Pasaport Contrel, EENTHAT esked how we evaluated
@n ability to withdraw gracefully at plane side if challenged by German



--- Page 14 ---
14-0000

authorities. I told him the chances were better than even and that we
would appeal to the fact that this. was a VIP party being handled out of
the regular airport procedures and that tne passports had been left in
the PAA -ffice. he would then put the party back in tne vehicle tnat’
took them out and just keep going. BENTHAM authorised us to proceed
with the “black” evacuation. : :

®%. I then made one Last call to KURIOT and told them if they-could
ROL complete their work and get tne passports to the airport. by 1315.
houre to forget it. With that MULPALL and eyself left for Rhein/ein.

5. We arrived at Rhein/Main exactly at 1250 hours as subject's
party was drawing up. The group wes then taken by @ clroultous route
Ro the PAA Operations Cffice.. It-was cscertained that PAA No. 73 would:
arrive at 1245 hours, approximately thirty minutes late.

26. During our weit at the PAA Operations Office, RO@DIME got me
@eide three or four times and kept me continuously aware of subject's
fear that an attempt rould be made to sabotage his plane, “ened -
evidenced this concern ever ainre his arrival in Frankfurt. Subject
told KOODINE he felt sure that Soviet agents would be found among some
of the employees of the commercial airlines and the managesent of Knein/.
Wain Airport. He mentioned the section of the KIB that works specifically
OA assassinations and sabotage. He was fearful of. any: baggage being _
loaded very late or any "spare baggage” that might be fSund aboard: the
@ircreft. I told ROGDINE we were very sympathetic but we were not about
to ask Naylor, wno had now gone much further than one could be reasonably
expected to on our behalf, to off-load the baggage of 184 passengers
and search it. oe

27. Two events happened while we were waiting in the offies to
beari the parties that were of some disturbance. The airplane Captain
reported to the PAA Operationg Officer that a gun was found aboard: the
Plane. Upon investigation it.was determined that this gun belonged to
an Armed Forces sourier who had carried classified material on the aire
e7matt to Frenkfurt. Ths cirpians captain, upon being asked ay Naylor
af whore pad decn eny unusual activities on the part of the passengera,

“then described ene party flying in the first-class compartment. This
“flight oid erdginated in San Francisco and was flying around the world
‘Weatbouid. At New Delhi a United States oitizen, a correspondent for

en unknown newspaper, boarded the plane with his wife and a female nurse,

‘The Might orew had been informed that he was an alecholis ard was -betng

retumes co the United States at the request of the United States Embasay |
@t New Delni.. For part of the trip he had acted in sosewhat of an .
Otmoxious fashion airi had insulted some of the other passengers. The

, Captcsn had investigated the situation and was of the opinion that the

Gorrespormdient was nw sufficiently drunk and lacked sufficient stamina



--- Page 15 ---
14-0000

9

29. At ebour 1300 houre w 1d Ralph a,
that he had another thirty minutes to get thefA : Pi

toly started to enter in those pb:
visitor's visas,

notified PAA Operations that Plight No.
éopart:

. ure end completely loaded.
. . Started to rim Es

“as ready. .
It was being -
@ entries cn tis Passports,
the Ground Crew Chief that



--- Page 16 ---
14-0000

ioned and they were recam-

Pubing total weight. At about 1405 tne (Aus Jan] Dassporta with United

SMAV@ vieas vere carried in a brown envelope bF @ PAA United Staces

Cititven eaployee and given to RODDE. The plane was then cleared for
and rolled out at 1414 hours,

Dy Me emly other information mou at the time of this writing
&8 WAX the aircraft was diverted to Hermuda because of bad weather
‘COGAN ions In New York. waylor telephoned me that information about
a @orning, 18 Decenber. :



--- Page 17 ---
14-0000

: [wre ,


