
--- Page 1 ---
14-0000

104-10177-10217 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |

; ae
Pete nas

:

SEC RET eaas2e2 ae

dae, cunsous Yen

| to: ‘“SIRECTOR., °

: BNINGZE EVEN DMELL RANGXER ;

i Létlca PRON

i a roNBow '
i :

: E. uf (8 ee ¢ = :

veces BO" SESTEEST GF CELE LRa meg :

: RECUESTED WHATEVER LE Vivi

i AGENCIES COULD PRGVENE 2N ANY Cor: :NEG-T1 ON BuThEEN CMAYDD GDS CW
: AVIZA AND THE “ASSASSINATION OF FORMER CHILEAN aegassange 28D.

p CASTNET MINESTER ORLANES “LE TEL LE Re oS BC

i 7 re er

: Hp oe :

t 2 a
: 7 IN

Dicanty Rorara low y


--- Page 2 ---
14-0000

MTB OTEAT GUTEL

TS OBAME te

DCae Mi

QNSESRETG

Wie

cane: TE RITKIN



--- Page 3 ---
ee.

7}
ve

any

£

*12-26

ecu

TRra-ZE073_,

FILES

3



--- Page 4 ---
14-0000

i SAYS THAT PARSONS WORKED FO% BKHERALD AND UNDERTOOK

FORM 30200
Tre Te

> 3
y 8 a9 9.
~°= 2 yo: OD
. . uy aeor s
° Cape sec ossew oy, . a ry
*REPROOECTION @Y OTHER THAN
ISSUING OF 7ICE 18 PROMIGITED

ACTION ©

7812745 = ET nee PAGE @1. yA In 266922 c

. TOR? Zz92Z342 APR 77 . CARA 32949

SE C RET 292¢052 APR 77 STAFF 0
{ ERO. SER. a

CITE. CARACAS 32949

BOG. mt
2519 2?
RYBAT WNINTEL REAM MICROFILMED
1. ON 28 APRIL 2977 KKDIET=5 REPORTED THAT R}caRDd
(SUBJECT OF 201°0285923), AKA

"Yo! DIRECTOR, LAsHIARI

“MORALES NAVARRETE
"EL MONO", IS RUMORED TG HAVE KILLED IN MIAME A CUBAN
WK DIET @5

EXILE BY THE NAME GF ROSERTQ PARSON S,

SEVERAL CLANDESTINE TRIPS TO CUBA, HE SAID AT TIMES PARSONS aa

HELPED GET PEOPLE OUT OF CUBA FOR A PRICE, PARSONS HAS Kobe

EXACT REASON FOR

BEEN MISSING SINCE DECEMBER 1976, THE
HIS ALLEGED MURDER 1S UNKNOWN,

“2+. FOLLOWING ARE TRACES ON ROBERTO PARSONS? ACCORDING a’
10 UMWAVE=1302, 16 FESRUARY 1968, AN AMCLEVE=15 fent|- 446
MIAME CONTACT WAS PROBABLY IDENTICAL WITH, nowerto “> ARSONS

RAMIREZ» BORN 12 JULY 1938 IN “GUANTANAHO « PARSONS WAS A y

BKHERALD AGENT FROM 2965 THROUGH 2967 WHEN HE WAS TERMINATED

ON 3e° NOVEMBER WITHOUT PREJUDICE, HE WAS USED IN EXFILTRATION {

‘AND INFILTRATION OPERATIONS ANG OCCASIONALLY REPORTED GRATUITOUSLY :
SECRET .

ALIS
; [RECORD COPY ner?
3201. 779687 are FFT S



--- Page 5 ---
rooms ae
swe ne
X i
of CAM Oe OpGEw eye fora, comes ave
4 PEPAOOUCTION BY OTHER THAN
, secre? IBEVING CHRICE 1D PRONMIBITEO
PeesON UN RONES =
: a
Advance COer sutE korres
Action UN
o

i)

Elaees PAGE €2-22 IN 286922 . .

7 TORI 2920342 AFR 77 : CARA 32949"

T 81¢745 —
<
x

ie ON THE DSE AND BGI.

i, . . .

7 3, INDEX PARSONS, FILE! p5~tee~eer 201-0285923. - 4

f. . . . - a

i E2» IMPDET.

7 ‘

;

ut t

‘f

5

: '
. . ) . . :

t . ‘

f ~~ we moog :

} -

eee


--- Page 6 ---
14-0000

ESIUIRE .
MANCH 1977 é

AR’ 20!0 APPEARED
WCE ST

“trail of a 1 Washington bomber, .
landed in Caracas and ran afoul of the

- Venezuelan secret service, warring ©.
“Cuban terrorists, the Miami police, the State
. _ Department, the C.1.A., the FBI.

and the most dangerous man alive ~all
this, and their mothers didn’t know —
*-adamn thing about it * .---

not look reassured. He does not
the way Branch reels off the life histories of all the -

” - C.LA. Cubans he has known, especially since the point -

77 ‘Washington: used ‘to, ‘be simple’ Journalists. and policy
- analysts. Now they are three-pay-phone men. That
means you can’t call then without using three pay
-"~phones. You'call them tp and ail they'll say is ‘phane
number ore.” Then they go to pay phone number one
.eud you. call them again. Then they ask you ‘for the

* i:number of nother pay phofe nezr yours, and they call

‘What do you talk about ,
“Things like p pay phones and letter ‘bombs and wheth-
.-er the Feds can be trusted. The last time I called they
told me we would be walking into four nests of known
killers: the Cuban exiles in Venezuela, the Venezuelan
“secret polica, the C.LA. and the Chilean-secret police.”
“Is that true?”
ay iat!

~ your mother you were going to Veneruea?™ _-

one point of denger.”

swers,” Branch replies, “or we may get them from peo--

- is always that the situation is-too complicated for .

words. “Tell me,” Rothchild says gravely, “did you tell

. Branch squirms at the cruel question. He wants to
appear as knowledgeable and confident 23 possibie, be~
cause he has dragged Rothchild into this adventure on
less than a day’s notice. “No, I didn’t teit her,” he.ad- - {
mits. “It's too complicated. But I think we'll only have |

“When's the point of danger
-“Well, we may get into the prison. and get our an-
ple in the Venetuelan government. Either way, we'll.
know who did the murders and who paid the killers
and what other murders they’ve done. That's what we
hope, anyway. If we get that informaticn, we'll be hot
til we get rid of it We'll have to Phoze it out |

|



--- Page 7 ---
14-00000

guess.” Itis Hidal ons reporter for The Alivai
‘News, standing in the aisle, wing down af us She _
is a specishst on Latin terrorism in Miami. .
“Looks like it,” says Branch, shruy: . Su much for
the secret trip. Yet he is inclined to st Inchin, even ©
though he an! Pothchitd had met her only that day, -
while going through clips at the morgue of the Nees.
~The three work out « way to m:ke contact in Caracas.
EBracch is embareacsed nt being a Jitte reserved.
Tnclan is candid, her face cheerful and open, so.
“Inchin leans over und whispers, “Listen, I think ‘you .
“should be careful. There's something strenge going on.
This Right i is crawling with cops: and Prosecutors from,

and their necks sink down into their shoulders. There
are two young Latin men in the back with neatly
Branch looks out the sates’ ures trimmed beards, unisex hairdos and brightly colored
Orlando. Letelier lying in the middle of: Massachusetts shirts. There aré severa) men in the front who do not
Avenue, his legs blown off at the thigh, his torso pul- look like ordinary passengers. Rothchild decides there
~verized, detectives all around, On ‘the curb nearby sat might not de any ordinary passengers...
his passenger Ronni Moffitt, her eyes frozen, boiding | ‘What are they doing here?” Branch asks ‘bluntly.
her throat, The ‘bomb in Letelier’s car had blown’a ‘Who knows?" says Inclan. “I know thesa guys from
stiver of metal through ‘Ronni Moffitt’s carotid artery, .-Miami. They give me tips -sometimes. But now they
and-she was drowning in her own blood. Her husband “aren't giving me the time of day. I don’t understand
sat nearby,” suffering from shock, watching his wife them, so I'm going to act just like they are. I don’
die. She was twenty-five. ‘The killers were the kind of “think you should ket them in on what you’ up t.
people who would machine-gun ‘a whole crowd of people . either.” _” . :
in a public square just to hit their mark. They “Those cops ara Cubans, aren’t they?” Branch asks,”
- wouldn't care about the others. Ronni Moffitt could just ©  -Imclan nods. Branch worries. Cubans on the Miami ~
3 easily have been half the people Branch knew in _ police force are a strange Jot, he has heard. The cops ||
Washington. The next day Jerry Ford rede right over - want to infiltrate Cuban terrorist groups and drug. >

for the President of Liberia; he never said a word the terrorists and drug runners are infiltrating the

C he bloody spots in the roxd/9a his way to a recedtion “running organizations, but sometimes it turns out that |
‘
U

bout Washington's first gangiand-style political ag” cops. - :

sassination. Unwise to. taix about it, especially if the __ Branch and Rothehila exchange signs - wilder. |":

‘force behind the murders is most likely the govern-~ mer Inclin drifts back to her seat. “Jesus Christ,
ent of : ‘Chile. . The military junta there” overthrew :

lier Was ‘ambassador to the United States under AR
nde, then foreiga affairs minister, “interior minister .
1d" defense minister. ‘He had been jailed and tortured

thougands of Cubans were trained in its use. Branch
had ‘not been surprised when “evidence came out that!
Cuban exiles raight haye pulled the Letélier job, hat
@ was ‘surprised dy tips he received that they had also ¢
ied hundreds of others on 2 big’ spree in the ‘Carib: 5
dean. “God, there is something big going on, he had -
thought. And all his sources and his ixstincts told him”
the answers were in Nenereels, of all places, cts 2 a oxy .

tle trip to Caracas too, I

neat Sag Se ES Ee ane ne CT



--- Page 8 ---
14-00000

a

* wars and’ feuds with his térrorist

-uz to Letelier'as quick ‘as I can ‘for now. The’ back:
. ground is simple: Bosch. has-been a political terroris
- What they call an action man—ever since the Ite For- |
, ties in Cuba. He worked foz Castro, then for the GLA,

John,” Branch mutters. “Ef figured we'd be in for some
Scrapes, but [ never thouxht it would start before we
even got there.” Then he’s all business. “I've got to
give you a quick briefing on cur maia man while we
have the chance. We may nol. have as much feisure

time as we expected,” |

Branch pulls down their dianer trays and ipreads out

a pile of notes and news clippings. Then he pulls out a

police mug shot. “Meet Orlando Bosch,” he say's.
Rothchild stares incredulously at a porcine Cuban

man with a thin moustache and thick lips “He Jooks

like the headmaster of a military school.”

. “I know,” Branch says, “but he’s a kiiter. He's “also
a pediatrician. This. whole thing’s lixe that—yin and

yang, Boston Strangler and Mad Hatter a! mixed up.”
“Branch eyes the mass of clippings and notes, wonder- -

ing where ‘to begia. “It would take all night to go

throug what I've heard about Bosch, so Vil get you

and then he denounced thé C.I.A; He has been an anti-

- Castro outlaw since the mid-Sixties, always telling the
' Miami Cubans not to trust the C.I-A. ia theif war
v3 ‘against Castro, Now most of the hard-line Cubans bé-

_ lieve him Bosch is the patriarch of Cuban terrorism.”

Branch pauses, -then ‘flips briskly through the clip-
pings. “Bosch got arrested and-indicted pretty regular-

., ly all through the Sixties. He usually got o2. The wit-
. nesses against him tended to sweat a Jot and forget
things on the stand, if they even showed up. In gen-
“eral, Bosch had a threefold operation: first, political

tervor against Castro sympathizers; seéond, ordinary
crimes like extortion from rich people and companies
to finance the political terror; and third, stl kinds of
1s, Fizaily, Bosch
t.nailed in 1968 for shelling @ Polish freight in

tid

“stikmai harbor. He yet te

- ii 1972. That brings us to his international period.” |~
Branch picks up one particular clip and holds it in >

Teadiness. “Bosch went underground two years afte:

‘his parole and the pace of Miami bombings escalated.
So did terrorist bombings against, Castro's embassies *. | |

all over’ the ‘world. Then, in 1978, important Cubans -
_Started getting, Imocked off in Rangland-style murders, ~ -
“A lot ‘of groups, including Bosch’s, tock credit for -;
“them, The word was that C.LA, stooges were being -
eliminated. Eosch bécame a phantom, Mysterious
.ures with names like Ernesto would pop up in the Mi- -
ami press to speak for him. Here's a Miami Neves clip
from this period. it's headlined ‘Bosch Declares War .
on Castro.” Hilda wrote it. She's the last American re-_
porter to interview Bosch. Shortly after it came out,
Bosch slipped out of the country.” + --..>.

While Rothchitd-studies the clips, Branch continues 1
“He got arrested in Venezuela about two years aga
_ The Justice Department decided not to ask for his re- *
turn to the United States despite all he’s weated for.
That's weird. Then the Venezuelans turned him loose,
and he left'with a bunch of Chilean bodyzuarcs and a |
. big pile of money. I heard all kinds of stories about *
Frosch being down in Chile with the Pinochet, junta |
* there, bargainin Now the stories jump to February =
of last year, whe Bosch got arrested in Casta Riea

_ Fight before Kissinger visited..The rumor is that he

wag plotting ‘to assassinate Kissinger. Bosch got out *
of Costa Rica so! ehow, and pretty soon there ¥ Wag -a’!
“secret nfeeting in the Dominican Republic of all the ~
major Cuban terrorist: groups, which the Dominicans ~

Howed, of course. There 1 was a negotiated trace, and

he terrorists united under Bosch in an umbrella group /
_ called CORU, supposedly with the jupport of several 7

Now J in the last month there haa been the Letelier:

that they were not sfraid to kill ia the United,

ight-in the capital. They have even thrésteaed
. to Kill one of the.F.RE. agents on the Letelier case,
And his flanéée. The anonymous threats show they

“have collected a lot of intelligence about the agent's

life. Tha F.RLL. is upset. Then, (wo weeks after Letelier

” Branch continues grimly. “The terrorists ‘| .

‘was killed, terrorists blew up a Cuban plane near Rar- >
.bados, killing seventy-three people. Castro blamed the
_C.LA, and canceled the antr-skyjacking treaty. The x

J terrorists toved ity Castro and the Americans petticng |

Dee ee eee

: 7 cussed



--- Page 9 ---
14-0000

mead at euch other. Then Bosch gut ar. al in Vene-
auela again, along with a whole bunch of Cuban exiles,
Stories have Been seeping out in the Venezuelan press
Linking Kosch with both Leteizer and the Cutan plane.
{ I picked up similar stories in Miazai. My sources there
tell me the Cubana in jail are almost vil fae or CAL
tren, ©.B.L informants and a few veterans of the Ven-
ezuelan secret police, the DISTP. Some peuple say
DISI? has tortured the hell out of these guys, but
other peopla say DISIP Is in bed with theim—holding
them under protective custody till the heat blows over.
Avs the Dianest o damn mess you ever sa.”

e and”

what you're up to, would you?” = a
Rotkchild and Branch leok up at ther man * standing

. in the aisle. He wears a leisure suit with a flashy shirt |

a ot ef tan and some

“opened to his sternum, showi

_tefted chest hair. ¢

“Well,” says Branch, “I'm not : sure. What are * you

‘doing? We're just thinking about  Facetracks and Cu.

_ bans and stuff like that.” -

* "Corse on now. You can tél me, the ran urges.

*. *“Don’t tell hint anythin ‘says Hilda Inclin from -
behind. She is laughing as if it were a game, but her

eres signal a warning. oe é

“*, Branch is way off-balan e fith. Why”

- eon" t we start with you?” 7

- "Okay,’says the man, smiling. “I'll play it your way,

fciend: My name's George Yoss I'm an assistant
state's attorney out of Miami.” He flashes an 1D card.

~ Branch and Kothehild can’t believe it. He seems more
{ tise a condominium salesman who wishes ke could ba a
gotf pro. “{s that right, Hilda?” Branch asks. ~ .

“Yeah, but he’s being a bad boy tonight,” she re-

- plies: “Tell .him to .mind his own business, whatever

cbance. I know you're a journ:
oth who you work for?” .: ‘

beea * covering up ‘the news “clippings unconsciously.
“These gave mé away, eh?” he says weakly. “I'll tell
you ¥ what You" 'vé got Ine e i

: wiay need me down here. You never Know. This

lis a strange Country and you guys could: fing yourse! ves
n the next plane out Tl give you one
T think I'll lay low for the momen

. the sly,” Braach says, “That sure didn't work out. Thi
_ fiight's like n goddamn convention! Tell’ ine,”
Nose of the Cuban cops is named Rat! Diaz, I hope

“That's Diaz right behind you,” she replies. or

“Od, shit!” says Branch. He turns slowly in his seat

“and -Snds himself staring at one of the’ handsome

yo 6
sts. ‘He is still kidding, but there is an edge to it”

“And you're Raul” Bre "yy gives him a Emp hand-
shake and stumps down in his sent Hilda Insian shakes
her head and walks of.” : :

“Who's Radli” asks Rothehila.

“He's Rolando Martinez’ son-in-law, One of the Wa-
+ tersite 5: Tepiat a iet of Sime with him rm Miami.”

“What's so had about that?” asks Rotheh:d,

“I don’t know, It's just that he prodably keows who

my. Cuban contacts ave, and I doa’t know what the hell
he's up te. You see, sonic of the people who have been
telling me about the terrorists are right-wingers and
some of them are left-winyers. F don't care about any-
thing except the Letelier murder, but I think i would
be healthy for us if we could keep the two groups
2 separate. The only way we con, do that
otincognite.” wr. ft

“You're doing great 30 far, Rotheh | Saye Nis
. mind has been wandering over the Rosch briefing.
“What makes you think we can gel into the prison to

+ they want to talk.to us?" > °° -

Bosch knows that would mean curtains for him. He
- also knows that he could get killed any day ia Vene-
zuela by either his friends or his enemies, He may fig:

United States. What we hope ja that he tants to get
some of his story out in the American press to feree
the government to turn the screws and get him back in

the States. That's what I hear from some of our Vene- -
zuelan contacts. J don't know if it's true, but they are _

_“pretly high up. Now even if we can't talk to Bases and

‘the other prisoners directly, we might get stud jadi.”

rectly from the Venezuelans,””
+ “What happens if all the Venezuelan contacts ‘tura

out to be flaky?” .

poke around,” a say Branch.

‘down here personally. He’s a Cuban named Ricardo
- Morales. 1 interviewed him back in 1974, just before
he came to-Vencauela, People in Miami tell me he's
vay -up high in the DISIP, the secret police. ‘I don't
know what he's doing z now, but he might be a gvod

Branch Sie “but I liked him anyway. He ea
have any ilusions about the business he's-in, and he
“makes fun of all'-the people who do. Ricardo {+ aa old

: : operator, even though he’s only in his Jate thirties. He
rorked for Castro's secret police. Then he worked for-

he CLA, as an explosives: expert. He fought for the
gency in the Tango In the aid ixtiés, and thea be:

” te court with eversthing on ope Then all bell broxe

blamed Rosch for, trying to kill him. Morales himself
‘was indicted for first-degree murder, but he st of,
7. Hels 9 aurviver it'there ever was one” *

See Bosch and his friends?” he asks. “And why would .

i=. “It's along shot,” Branch answers. “But Bosch i isin’.
ay ‘tough spot. The Castro government wants hin, and—

-ure that-his best chance to survive is to come ta the

“*T have a lot of names. There's only one guy I know ~

loose. Morales’ car was Siown up, He survived but -



--- Page 10 ---
nat to tell Kothe
ot CIA, Cubans
in Miami believe Bosch and Morales
havo patched things up. Uranch does not
Delieve it and it would make things too
enacted, “It's amazing that the Veaseue
ans would havea guy like Morales high
up in their security apparatus,” he says
absentntindally?*1 mean he’s a Cuban,
and he haa worked fur Castro, the CLA,
and the F.B.L, and he's a v
gangland-type ‘warfare. Ie'a hi
a West German high upin the CLA, and
then discovering that he has also worked
for the KGB and the Shoh of fran. But
from what I hear, that’s a pretty com-
cmon background to have down here.
U There are Cubsos all over Latin Ame
2 fen.”

a>, Branch berins packing up the news-
7 clips.
q plane,” he says. "We're suppored to get
-aceall at the hotel around midnight. .
*. That ‘gives us an bour to yet through
“customs and_ get settled. I want to

v hustle away from’ these Buy: ad, mn:

j sure wer! re on fime.” .

“a Greeting’ tram Rémulo
, Rothchild and Inclan Motles a huddte
1 of shady five-footers lurking Jn a dark
i eorner beside the airport entrance.
~ They must bea Venezuelan tour group,
_. Rothchild thinks, waiting for » be resin
> flight ont of the country. I'm not going
to get paranoid about-everythiny I see.
But the group stares at the passen-
. gers; their suits blend so well into the
shadows that oll you sea are theie mir-
tor sunglasses, They look like » dis.
“play of Foster Grants at the back of
an unlighted drugstore. .
vo They stop looking onty- whan “the
$ Miami assistant state's attornoya and
cops; the samo ones who have been
: bugging Branch oa the plane, go over |
-“ aid give some of the men in the ahad.
ows warm, Latin’ embraces. facta
thinks it is'a meeting between the Si-
__ sami Jaw-enforéement contingent and
. the Venezuelan © seeret ‘police, She
catehes up fn the Jina and says.sha has
recognized one of the people in the po-
“lice “hudd!e ns Ricardo Morales, ths

“mysterious Cuban who Is supposed to-

“be Branch’s fallback contact in. Cara-
ens, Branch is stutined. First he fs read-
“ing clips about Cubans and cops,: and
the Cubans and cops start fingering
him on the airplane. Now Morales.
me your papers and follow
booms suddenly, It bo
. “Tongs tos man in a turtleneck sweater
“rand leather jacket. A flunky moves next
to each report-r in the line, There is
. hothing to do but hand over the pas»
* ports and follow.
*- Turtleneck and his auig herd the re
porters irito a special room at the back
( of the sirport. He disappears irite an-
othee oifice, leaving them alona with an
oh man seate) behind a desk, There
+ $a furious typing coming {rot the adja-
tent reory into which Turtienerk has
disappeared, Ms Gunkies keep running -

“Pm paranoid as hell adaut this -

Ta about ten minutes, Turtlene-k roe
turns anal hamds each of the reporters a
citacién—in tripheate, Rothchild, trans-
lating for Branch, doesn't remember
the lepal definition of the word eitas
cidn, He dors, however, recognize o
word farther down in the document
edreel. Carcet means jail The reporters
are being sammoned to attend sume
Kind of ineeting in a sinister-sounding
room, D-034, ino building somewhera
fn Caracas at nine aim. the following
day. The letterhead belungs to DISIP,
Turtleneck keeps sa: itis all rou.
tine—just sign the e.tacton and -every-
boly can get a good night's sleep, While
+ Rothchild steuggles to understand the
; fine print, Inclin tells him she thinks it
“night be a mistake to acknowledge the
* stimmons, It might conceivadl ly be con-
-strued as an admission of something,
and the reporters don’t know what it is
-for, Inclin decides to try an offensive

to get information, She whips ott her.

“ notebook as if to write a traffic ticket
ond ssks Turtleneck what his name is.

" He doesn't answer. She repeats the

question and. finally he mumbles, “Ine
spector Rémulo,” * a

“That's all there is to it?”

“Yeah. Just Romulo.”

“Who ordered yor to do this?”

“§ don’t know, [can’t say, It's just a
procedure.” s

“Why is this happening to us?”

“It is so because it is so,”

Inckin writés that down,

Beanch, whose rudimentary knowl.
edge of Spanish often led him to offend
the Cuban community in. Miami—where
he would mean to say “iwhat a krand
wedding this is” and end up

“what tremendous tits you Sav
getting a headache trying to keep up
“with the conversation. “Isn't there.

‘ somebody who speaks English here?”’.
‘he keeps‘asking.
. ’That's alt” right,” says Rothchild.

>“The guy isn’t saying a damn thing 5
Spanish, either.” Inclan agrees. ~

The reporters get nowhere... Police
. keep’ circling, and an evasive Rémulo
Kreps. cracking his knuckles, pacing
Back and forth between rooms, thrust-

ing pens into the reporters’ hands hike -

door-to-door calesmau pushing maga-
jae subscriptions, Inclan asks him if

Romulo says, “No, you won't go to jail
-for that, and I don't care what you do.
My orders were to hand you thit ei
tai
is entirely.up to you”

Inclin decides te accept the summons
but not to sign it, based on Rémulo’s
assertion that it ‘rémains in. force no
mattée what. Branch and Rothchild go
along after » brief huddle. Rémulo is
definitely peeved. He hands. each of
them a summons in aa envelope and
tells them to leave.

“1 don't understand how they picked
us out,” says Inclan ia the cab, “Es-
pecially you, John, You're not even
coming as a reporter. They coulin’t

Jheve gotten us of our documents.” The .

-one of these bombings

they will go to jail for not signing. -

and that I have ‘done. The rest.
.\ think that’s a good sign.”

or otical explanation Is that seme-

_ one on the plane tipprd wif the Vead

tuelans. Bat whyt

Eeanch thrashes areund in his spy
world for answers, Nothing seems to
fit, ‘The three af then theorize all the
wny to tie hotel, and they ean only
aeto, like Alexamier Haig, on a sinis-
fer force, Branch is still sure that the
summens wil be lified ay soon.as he
can talk te his friendly contacts In
Venezuela, Rothchild keeps looking out
the window for a tail, .

A Visit to a Small Hotel

The taxi drops them of ut the Anauco
Hilten, whero Inclin is staying. Branch
offers to carry Inclan's bags. The lobby,
amazingly, is filled with the same
DISIP lu.kers; they have managed to
move their whoie scene intact. They
ure leaning ayainst walls and sitting
en the couches, Rranch lovks toward
the elevator in time to see the Miami |
attorneys, and cops scurrying to get in-

_ side, frantically pushing buttons to get

the door to close. They are as jittery |
about seeing the reporters as the re-
porters are about seeing the Venezue-
lan goons. And the most jittery of ‘all,
in the saiddle of the elev: ‘ator, Is Ricare
do Morales himself. Morales is staring

. at the ceiling, trying to avoid eye con-
. tact, and Branch has the feeling that

Morales is scared, 1t is the first time
ho hes seen fear on the face of this
hardened veteran of Congo wars and
Castro plots and murders, Seeing

- Morales scared makes Branch seared,

He warns Inclaa not to so anywhere or

\. do anything—just to call him when he

arrives at his hotel, the Avila,

Mack in a tad Branch is going
through another run of Cuban polities.
“ST don’t know, John,” he says. “Maybe
Morales is behind all this, but I can't

-figure out why he's doing it, He sure

lovked as if he's in trouble. He could
havé been making some secret deal with
those cops. Something he knows about
in Miami.
Morales might not hnow that we were
on the fight by accident. He. might
think we were tailing the cops.”

Rothchild is trying not to listen. The

‘only, sure contact ke thought Branch |
had has suddealy turned into a poten- i

tial enemy, Rothchild is petrified by
the thought that Branch has gotten in

“over his head. “I think we are in more

trouble,” he says. “Look Behind you.”

ere isa tail The other
ear is right on their bumper as they
wind up the back streets of Caracas.
“They aren't even pretending not to be
following,” Rothchild says, “1 don't

Branch, overwhelmed, keeps looking
at the car behind them. “You know,”
ho says with a smile, “this is the first
time I've ever been tailed.” Mothchihl +
feels an Hf he is being cranked through |
the roller of Graham Geeene’s type. |

. writer,

They reach the Hotet Avila, a Casa |
Dlanca-type place at the top of a hill, !
It veems deserted until Rothehild looks

down from-a balcony near their room, ;
There are people pulling inte the drive. ;
way a smail ore aod they have i



--- Page 11 ---
14-0000

wWalkietalkios and revolver bulges at
the wauts of their plain dark suits,
They station themselves around the
hotel entrance and oven in the flower
deals. They have the place surrounded.
There have been no -phone calls—or
( at Teast that {a the wont from the desk.
Branch paces nervously around the
. room, Ne thinks that something he al-
\ ready haves about C.[.A, Cubana and

terrorism: must bo the key to what's

t happening, but he doesn't kaow what it
4 . is, He tells everything he knows’ to
+ Rothehild, going ell the way back

* theough Prio and the preCastro stu-

- deat movement, Rothchild — thinks

* Branch has lost his mind, It is fear, he
fisures, Branch realizes that Rothchild
> fs lying down on the bed pretending not
to be awake, that he has fallen into a
tupor, It is fear, Branch figures,

‘Then a call comes through, but it is not
he contact Branch awaits, tts Inclan,
‘who has been denied a room at the Hil-
toa (even though sho had ‘a reserva.
tion) and .she can't reach anybody at
the U.S, Embassy. She wonders what
the helt is going -on. Branch tells her
the situatiua at the Avila, but she de
cides to come over; there, ate. lots of

<> show some solidarity. -
It takes a Jong time, too long, for
. Inchin to show up. Branch wanders
~ downstairs; Rothchild waits by the
‘phone for calls thut never come. There
ig &n uproar at the desk, The clerk is
telling Inciiin there are no rodims avail-
. + able even though the bank of keys is
behind him in full view, He holds shat

C positioa for about: five minutes, then--

-Fetreats to “there is some problem with
you people. [ean’t give you a roum.”

” Me seems scared, Everybody. seems:

scared, Denying ~% woman a root at
+ three a:m. in Venezuela is a serious

co . ‘three reporters talk. about it, but they
+ éan’t sit down or move around without
being followed, almost mimicked, by.

* rooms and at least’ the reporters can

violation of the chivalrié code. The-

Nem in the lobby ot all times. Inclin
ecides she will sleep on acouch in the
Inbby, and ahe wonders If she should
puton ker nightown fos the poons.
Sho sets her bays beste one couch,
and the betihop diseets her over te a
Betts one wit a gracious flourish: ae
could have been opening tne door to
the weddings suite.

Alter va.nly scouring the lubby for
pay phones, the reporters uxreea that
they have to make a move for the roonr
so they can talk near a phone. The
three make their way up the stairs like
Cary Grant tiptucing between bed-
rooms. To their relief, no one stops
Inclaa,
> Branch offers Inclan hia bed, saying
he will steep on the floor. Rothchild
doesn’t say anything, but Lis paranoia
tells him it is foolish to give the Vene
ruelans a chance to arrest them under
the pretext of immoral conduct. Keth.

sit because of his, He doesn’t want to be”

listened in on. Branch and Rothchild
are not communicating much wi each
other by new, Each is worried that

“ whatever he says the other sill think it

is crazy, .

Inchin tries to phone her editor tn
_ Miami, but it become’ clear after about
an hour of excuses that the desk clerk
isn’t going to put through her call.
Local lines still seem to- be availsble,
but whom to call? Branch has his list
of connectivas, but these people are in
their own ‘delicate situations and
Branch doesn't want to blow their cov-
ers by calling at four a.m. on what is
-eertainly a tapped line. Inclin can’t gec
an answer at ‘the U.S. Embassy. Roth:
child has nobody to call, and that is one
-of his (problems. Since he is so ur-
connected with the story, he is sure
that the police will figura he is the ~
heavy—a deep-cover C.LLA. man out of

- retirement from the Everglades,
By elimination, the reporters can
- think of only one person in Venezuela
they could contact. Inchin’ has

' ens to swallow them up,

fiy 4 eut, from her visit ts the
Av 10 Hiton, what Moor Ricardo
Morales is ataying on ond she thinks
sho koows what his rus number fs.
Hee plan is ts call him directly. It is
slearly a de=peration mes Seclan
tangs up Morales at-tre Ansuco Hiltun,
apol tres for the hour and heyins to
eupisin her precicans but it is clear
things are not xuing well, Slorsies ap-
rently is denying that he is Morates,
uw aren’t Rica.do Murales?” Inclan
asks incredulously. "You know me and
Tt know you. I tained to your nephew
in Miami yesterday. Hus family is fine
and ba sends his warmest regards”: |

There is a pause ard Incian begins |
to seund hike w# panelis: on What's My
Lino?. “You've never heasd of a Blo-
tales? Who are you then? Your voice
founda familiar, You're not a Venezue-
lun. You sound Cubaa, Are you a
Cuban?” Morales saya he 13 tired of .
being interrupted in his-sleep; he hangs
lip the phone. . o

An air of resignation bas’ settled
over the room. It is almost morning ~
and the goons are still stand.ag by the J.
bushes. The reportera ave under soins -
Kind of house crest aad they feel _
caged, ‘They wonder why Morales has -,
+ just denied beieg himself. Maybe all ~y
this is happening because they know
who he is and Morales fears they will
ruin his cover identity. Or maybe
Morales doesn’t want Branch to reveal -
his background to anybydy in Vene-
zuela. The reporters kick this notion
around, but it doesn’t fit. It seems pre-
posterous that the Venezuelansa don’t -
know about Blorales’ previous lives,
which are talked about all the time in
the Miasni rumor mill,

Branch paces. around the room, try.
ing-to make his mind-catch up with his
, fears, He even asks. Inclan- whether s!
is guarding some secret’ that mig’ t
. have caused the trouble. Inclan says‘no
and politely doesn’t return the question. -.
The reporters already trust each other

instinctively, but the spy world threat
They de.

“tothe DISIP, --
“ Inclan goes off tothe lobby tor some

even_keard Bosch had been *
ie ke in Morales’ apartment, But it :
doesn’t make any-sense. Nothing does.
Branch babbles on until Be finally runs >
out of nervous energy. “Well, John,” 3
he says, smiling thinly as be sinks onte
the bed, “Lf was right about one thing.

I told you it wouldn't be a boring arerke ws

Morales Takes Over

* It ‘da five-thirty am, and comeboly i

* pounding on the decor. Rothehild, a light -
steeper, jumps out of bed. He opena the - |
door Just a crack, and thea-the door is 4
thrown back so hard it bengs against >
the wnll Tike a gunshet, A mar ino |
green suit with a Jone calkietatk:
hanging from his beit bursts past Roth.
“ehald, throwing on sil ei



--- Page 12 ---
14-0000

1 Pach!” he pets Un half a secoml he fs
all the way across the room, “Pack! *
Kranch pits vp straight in bel and fa
the most plaintive voice Kethchitd has
ever heard him use, a mixture of recog.
nition, terror, disappointment, conlue

{ sion and pleading, oays Just une word:

4

1

“Nieardo?”

It fe Morales all ‘right, Branch
watches him snatch back the curtains
to cheek the balcony, then duct around
the choirs, “Pack!” There is a rhythm
to his oeder, He is maving like a cat,
frenzied but in total centeel, Rothchikt
feely tha energy coming off him in
waves. He ships into the bathroom to
piss just to get away from Morales,
but he is so scared that nothing comes.

More orders come cut in staccato
burste—"Get those bags closed! Give
me your passports! Give me your air-
line tickets!" Branch ard Rothchild
are convinced that he wants to destroy
the documents before ‘he kills them.
Morales leaves the room within -two
minutes, but his ‘performance leaves so
“much afterlife that Rothchild and
-Branch don't do anything oi

left. They don't call.anybody, don't
«sneak off the balcony; they don’t even
say a word to each other. ©

the phone rings, then look dumbly at
each other. Branch picks up the re-
_ ceiver, grunts, and puts it down. “All.
the guy said was, 'He is waitiny,’” he

. tells Rothchild. Branch's own voice

sounds far off to him. wo

Inclan has had~rough going dewn- -

'
tthe pupulatad areas and into those
sits where executions aml accidents,

take place, Branch is desperately try
ing tu make contact with Muralea. He
mentious sume people from Miami ainat
he and Morales had once Ae to tor,
kether, But every tine Hranch dropa nw
fiame, Morales turas the volume up on
the radi. He leaves it that way, bare
fing, until the questioner gives tp aint
Bits bach in his seat, Rut desperation
creates another question, another try,
which ends in another mambo bist
Ecanch gives up on the name-dtiopping
and even tees some spy-world guilt
protiction. “Rip would not hie what
you are doing to us,” he says, “Rip
would be ashamed.” Rip Robertson was
Moraies’ gun-toting case officer in the
Congo operations, Rothchild thinks ~

Branch is foulish to bring up the Congo -

and remind Morales how little he cares
for human Ife. Morales says nothing.
He just gives the radio knob another
twist ~-. ves .

Indian is taking the personal route
again, talking ‘absut this nephew she
Morales who live in Miami. Morales

risn’t answering her, either. He is get-
- ting tired. of the radio, Now he just

get some steep.. Watching Morales-nod,

the fury turned off- like a_ light, .

Branch’s mind is filled with memories: :
of Miami Cubans telling stories of
legendary agents who would drop off
to sleep just before landing in Cuba on
a C.LA. commando raid, He never quite

Cara whether they will ever cet to
find eo. what it ix Nobule, after all,
Anows wbere the reporters are, und
only thing on their side, besides some
veatigral compassion that might reshte
pomewbere even in goons, is the rense
that weld opinion would be on Mo-
rates’ Lack Uf they did net tortured or
dilled, Wat that!
epinton Was on the terrurists’ backs
about the Cubsn airline crash and
about Letclier and Mothet, They killed
them anyway, They didn’t give a damn,
The car piils up at the airport, It is
Jess than eisht hours since the report-
era entered the country, and they have
talked to nobody cacept Morales, the
foons ond each other, Their best guess
is that Morales plans to keep it that
way.) Dt

Breakfast at Hicardo’s * -
Morales marches the greup through
part of the sirport lobby and then up
some: back stairs, past the meteorology
room and into the tower section. They
arrive at a locked, knobless door with

he has has‘seen, mentioning ‘other relatives of 4 gmail pass-through window, and

Morales has to knock before it is
opened from the inside. They hive
arrived st the goon control center.

Both of them jump off the floor wher ~ Jeans_his head over against the door to There is a four-drawer cabinet where

the DISIP ‘police file their guns and
ballet clips like memos. There is an
did-couch,-n. few desks, and in an ad-
joining room some bunk- beds, All the
people from the night shift arc still
there, including: Rémulo, in the sume-
turtleneck and the same leather jacket,

” stairs, maybe rougher than the other “believed the stories, but he thinks ‘fhe most impressive new lurker is a |.

two Because she is alone and also be.
cause shé is not yet a, U.S. citizen.
; Morales wakes her. up with the same
+ staccato commands, She thinks maybe
;,he is going to take her away and have
H her deported back to Havana. She js so
seared that she locks herself in the
‘ bathroom and doesn't. come out until
she hears the other two reponters stum-
‘bling downstairs with their ba; -

Morales twists the knife with a Jittle

humiliation. “Pay your Dill!” he yells,
Branch doesn’t think he shonld have to

pay for the hospitality he has received, planning to expel them, it would seem” next, Morales walks out with a wide
_ but he pulls out"his wallet without a. Hy co

Second’s . hesitation. “Pick up your

bags! Let’s go!” The reporters’ are”

hustled out of the lobby, past a squdd-
ron of sunglasses, Bf
:ghead of them, b iz. orders on

walkietalkie. It is still dark. |”

’ ‘fhe reporters are put into the back
of a car.. Morales and a driver are up
front. Nobody Is talking much. Branch

“fs wearing his‘ best suit, which he does .

not remember putting on during BMo-
rales’ brutal prodding. Now he thinks
maybe something deep in his uncon:
-scious had ordered him to'look his best.
Rothchild is terrified that they are
traveling In a private car instead of
_ an official police car. His fear of being
officially detained is rapidiy. being re-
placed by a fear of being unofficially
i bumped off.” He keeps looking back at
the car full of goons that is following
close behind as they careen down the
mountain at one hundred twenty ki-
lometers an bour, - .. ot -
2: Tho car {s heading out of town now,

Jaen tet os

Morales’ nap is very effective theater,
Rothchild ix also watching the nap,
Every time Morales nods, Rothchild
thinks he is ducking so thut the bullets
from the cay behind won't hit him.
Rothchild ducks, too,” -

After about twenty minutes of driv-
ing, the read flattens out and the re-
porters can see the airport in the dis-
tance. Blorales mentioned “uirport”
once back in the hotel lobby, but the;

“ reporters were never sure he‘ intended
“to take them there. If he were just.

that he could afford to be more com-~
minicative, more curious about what
. the reporters were doing, moré worried
about the kind of story they might

ales ig: already write about him. But, Morales asked. ¢,:
Ss

‘nO- questions, Rothchild knew from
_Braneh’s incessant’ briefings. that Mo-”
- rales wore a lot-of hats: terrorist as
well informant, mercenary as well |
as_cop, bomber as welt a3 representa-
tive of a government, It might be more-
paranoia to think We would kill them,
Dut ‘all last night's paranoia-had come ;
true. . . -

* ‘The reporters know orie thing: they
have stumbled onto a story that is
big enough and sensitive erough that |
top peopla in the Venezuelan DISIP |
‘are interrupting theif sleep and risk- |

H
|
i

ing diplomatic ‘reprisals ti scare the
hell out of them. It isn't routine in
. Venezuela, une of the few South Ameri-
“can countries left with any sense of
freedom of the press. There is ‘some
thing big going on, and the reporters j
don’t know, a3 they speel through i

Wee

character they call “Et Largo,” or “The
Leng One” aa .

It is clear now that the plan is not
torture, it is deportation, but the re-
porters sense that the plan could easily

j be changed. Morales is stalking be.

tween rooms, giving ‘orders and mahk-
ing éalls, and when he looks at the re-
portérs he seethes with anger, Inclin?{
and Branch are directing more ques-
tions at him from the couch, He an- |
iz with contemptuous looks. -
3 prepared for What happens

- No on.

grin on his face. He clasps hia hands«
toyether like a waiter and cheerfully
addresses the reporters: “Is anybody-|
‘hurigry? Are you ready for some breaks

‘The reporters follow Morales dumbly
down the maze of corridors. They de-
cide there is something oriental about
recent developments, and they are con-
vinced Morales could show them. great
courtesy one moment and yank ont
their. ‘toenails "the next. They follow
Morales down the corridors until they
‘come to a small dining room that ap-
pears to be reserved for airport per-
sonnel. Branch gives fleeting thouyht |
to the idea of making a scene, but:
he decides Morales would not “have,
brought them here unless he controlled -
tho area. Besides, Branch realizes, he
does’ not have the courage to make a
scene in front uf Mernles, who still has |
the reporters nearly parnlyzed ; with

fright. . .

Morales Tays his big walkie-talhio
down on the table and sadps for ay

1

3 just the point—world



--- Page 13 ---
14-0000

“Waiter, “Woes “ein you Pave?” he pashs ”

tet¥e

reporters had ficuret brea fart
was probably a ruse, 80 they think
about foul for the first Gime, It is a
atruggle. Hothchiid's stomach fs filled

swith embalming fluid. He feels quensy

looking at the mene. branch ashe only -

for coifes and an order of toast, Hoth-
child follows suit, Morales looks disap.
poited and urges them to eat more.
heartily fuchin orders eygs and Mo
rales looks pleased. He orders a sump-
tuous breakfast for himself. It arrives
Promptly. -
¥ he asks grandly, “who do you
think will win your election, Carter or
Ford?”
- | The reporters “exchange the lovk,
familiar by now, that signals their”
“agreement that- absurdity has reached

new heights, They mumble offhand an-

- SwWers as Morales listens intently.

"You don’t really have much choice,”
+--de-yout* he asks. “I niean, yeu have

two guys who don't have any ideas and ~
don't have any backbone, right? And

neither one of them can command any- *

ing or step anythirig, so it doesn’t
any: difference, right? At least
what 1 set from Time muga-

that’s
rine.”

Indlén tries to change the subject.
She asks Morales about his position in
the DiSIP and gets no response. She
mentions Morales’ nephew, whom she
knows in Miami, and Morales parries the °
remark. Suddenly a cloud comes aérosa
his face, °°

“What's the inatter with you?” he
demands, “Why aren’t you eating?” He
~ points down at the dry toast, which
Branch and Rothchild have been pick- .
ing at like wafilers at Communion, °

- “Aren’t yon hungry?” - -°
” Branch nods yes; Rothchild nods no,"
* “You told me you hadn't gotten any

breakfast, so I- give you breakfast,” .'

., Morales declares angrily, waving his .

arms. “If you ave not hangry, you are *
liarst What's the matter With you?” ~
.. The reporters: are exasperated, “We

are afraid and confuséd,”. says. Inclan, .
++ “beeniuse nobody will tell us why this is |

happening ‘to us. I-am a reporter like
all the _other reporters down here. I
-want to interview Orlando Bosch Ii
Idid cree before...” :

“Never heard of him,” interrupts”
Morales. He gives us an exaggerated

shrug land a quizzical look.

Inclan shakes her head in despair,
-“Oh, come on, You testified against him
cight years ago in Miami an! now he’s
the mest famous © prisoner in Latin
America, He's in your jail.”

“Did. he inake Tims magazine?” asks

Morales.

“Yes,” says Branch,

“I guess I missed it,” says Morales,

» He pauses, then turna to Inchin. “You

should net be running around asking so
many questions,” he says sternly. “You
are a woman,
home having babies and making their
men happy. Nothing else.”
¢Inclan is rutled, “EL can work as well
a@4& most other reporters,” she says.

Morales shahes his head vigurously,

“No you can’t, You ace a hundnd miles j
. : .

aw ' from reality.” He tooks off and
pai again,

ws don't think 10,"
think ou ore.”

“No,” says sturates, “You are ahun-
dred miles from reality, and IT om a
hundred years from reatity. You under-
stand the difference?”™: .

“IL don't know wont I understand,”
saya Inclan, “ft know something nbuut
you. Taylor says he talked to you about
your background in Miami and you
tulked to him like a ‘friend. He says
you were nice and now you are,

“f am rot nice,” snaps 3
“You know what I used to do in Cuba
when T was ao hid? I sent anonymous
death wreaths to my friends. aul the
time. Is that nice?”

Branch does not like ‘this subject or
the faintly homicidal look he sees be
foe him. He decides to make another
- stab at levity. “Look, Ricardo,” he says,
“I'm upset that you and your men have
kept me from seeing anything about

the lust-game of the Warld Series Tast
night.” -

“The World Series,” he say:

saye Incldn “1

the World Series. It is just like the
“ world everywhere: the Reds are win-
-. ing and the Yanks are losing!" Mo-
rales breaks into laughter. Something
snaps in the reporters and they laugh,
too, uncontrollably. Fear floats out of
their mouths and they feel better,
» Rianch wades in to reestablish con-
tact. “Look, Ricardo," he Says gamely,
“ can't help thinking this is some kind
* of mistake. I want to be straight with |
“you. All I’m interested in is the mor- :
der of Orlando Letelier, That's what 1.
:t came down here for, and E want...”
“He's the guy who got blown up in

" Washington, right?” Morales breaks in, ;“S¢E¥esy stabbing 'in the dar

hink I saw that in Tine”

““That’s right. He was blown up right
around the corner from my apart.
ment”

§

Women should be at |”

forales,

| You aren't like you were the last time

opening widé, “Let me tell you about ©

a
I them because of Letelier. The three of

- softly,

Welt what | are you doing in Veno-
suclaé was killed in Wi ashington 1
Morales cemands,

“Hecause IT think the people who
conspired ty bill bins are here. That's
what my sources say, and it has even
been in nome of the Venezuelan news-
papers.”

Morales luohs disgusted. “You
shouldn't read the newspupers,” he says -
tightly. “They lie, And you should in-
vestigate that murder in Washington
instead of coming halfway, around the:
world.” .

Branch tries another ‘tack. “or don't.
understand what's behind this, Ricardo,

I saw you, in 1974. Don’t you remem-
ber? It was at night in Miami Beach,
and you brought your girl friend over
to the house I was staying in. And
Fotingo Silva was there. And Tamayo
was there. We talked almost all night *
‘about the Congo. Why have you
changed? Ig there something 2 - -’
. Branch stops because of what he sees
on Morales’ face. a

- “You are lying!” he explodes. “Thave
“never heard of Ricardo Morales! This
is the first time I have ever met you,
and it is the first time you have met
me! Understand? I have never seen
you before in my life! If you say dif- .

happen to Jiars!”

Inchin comes to Branch’s rescue. “I
have seen your picture,” she says, “and
I'm sure who yeu are. 1f you're not
Morales, then what is your name?”

“{ don’t answer personal questions,”

: Morales says, smiling, trying to look |
shy.

“[ think maybe you figure there's a

Hrranch ob- |
But there 4

little spy conspiracy here,

7
7

ferent you are lying! And bad things
1

isn't, John and I are old friends, but \

we just met Hilda yesterday. She is
interested in Bosch and his friends be-
cause of the bombings in Miami and
the Cuban plane, We are interested in

us just happened to come, down. here .
on the same plane.” ~~

“Oh, really?” says Morales dubious.
_ ly. “I guess you are good friends now.”

“{ guess we've gone through some-
thing together,” ‘says Rothchild,

“Now you have something in com-
mon,” he nods, “feigning tenderness,
“Let's see, what else is thére? Have
you all been married?” The reporters
nod, “How about divorced?” The re
porters nod again. “Once?” They nod
again,

Morales holds up three fingers. “I
have been divorced’ three times,” he
says, “after four kids. I haven't” seen |
them in seven years.” This hangs in the
air.

“Do you miss them?” asks Inclén. .

“Not the children,” Morales says
“Just the wives sumetimes, I

. don’t miss much. You know I haven't

slept in two years.” The reporters give
each other significant looks, like shrinks
attending a primal-therapy session,
“If you are going to kick us out of
the country, you should at least let us
call our families,” Inclan saya “My
editors are going to be worried. We



--- Page 14 ---
* have appeintments’ and those pecile.

don’t have any idea where we ara, Why
can't you fet us make at least one
phone enil?"

Morales has shed his nuelancholy and
slipped into a new persona, He is
eager, “You're right," he rays. “IH call

~ them, Anyouly you went, Tell me who
your appointments are with.” He pulls

(

> wanist

outa pen inl Mash. Branch blinks. He-

is startled by Tow fast Morales moves
and how fiercely he snaps the point
down, +
The reporters glance knowingly at
- each other, They share a vision of
* Morales hauling their contacts down to
2 DISIP’s welcome wagon, Wer re not that
. dumb, they think,
Inclan tells Morates to entt her editor
sat The Miami News, a oafe,
call. Morves speils out the name letter

sevious .

by ‘letter as he writes on his napkin *

“: Vike a schoolboy taking down his home-"

> work.; He is putting show, He
jooks at Branch. -
“Tell Orlando” Bosch it doesn't look
if IN be able to make it this trip,
Branch says. “He's in the DISIP Pris:
on.” : “

The ‘reporters ciegle, bub Morales
deadpans. 1

- “You've gs pelled 7
Inclan. “It's ose. h.”
“Dm sorry,” says Morales,
~ Morales keeps writing. “You are a
. funny one," he says jovially, He looks
* up. “Anybody else?”
“( > “Yes,” says Branch,. He has been

wrong,” says

+ trying ‘to think of one of his contacts
in Venezuela who would’ not be vul-
nerable to Morales but whose clout
might impress him, Any name is a risk,
but he decides to take one.,“Tell the

7 O-r-l- a-i1-a-0

“governor of Caracas that I won't be.”

able to see him. His naine is Diego

Arias, Do’ you know hitn?” ©
Branch studies Morales for.
‘ tion, but there i: is riohe.

reac:

” After breskfost, as the procession goes
by a pay phone, Inclan suddenly an-
> =. nounces, “i'd like to make one call ‘to
the American Embassy.” She breaks

a » step and maréhes toward it, the first -

+ sign of overt resistance. Bforates

. freezes Branch and Rothchild with a.

* .malicious glance and walks. with ‘her,
shaking his head. Support goons appeat
: drom around corners; They’ seem re-

: ing room. It_has a

- Aa hour Ioter, Morates suddenty
tiebriizes his entire o: Somo ef his
men crab the reporters’ suitcares and

h. Others take of for unknown
destinations, The rest fal! in arcund
the remmstere and Morales leads them
briskly cut the duor.

Rothchild figures they have just
enough time to make the fen am. Right
to Miami thzt he hid seen posted on a
board some time earlier, He eenses an
end coming and feels sone relief, But
when the entourage emeryes on the air-
port's main concuurse, Morsles turns
toward the exit into Caracas, | not
toward the planes. .

-“[ thought you were putting us on
the plane,” says Branch, “Where are
we going?” ou

“To the other. airport,” ‘cays Mo.
rates, His mind is elsewhere -

“What happens if we mak
when you- put us on the pia
Hin asks, “What then?” °°

Morales’ face is taut but breaks-into
a tour-guide smile. “You will either
leave _Nenezuela- nice and - happy,-
or...” He pauses, “Or you Will leave
nice and happy.” He delivers the last
line with a lilt, as if making a rhyme.
‘the reporters absorb the” menacing
smile and fal silent,

Se ee

Several ‘cars screech up to the curb, .

Once loaded, they. take off at the usual
torrid pace. Branch feels panic open-
ing trapdoors under his lungs and he
Jeana over to Rothchild. “Holy shit,

John,” he whispers. “I don’t think there

ia snother airport in Caracas,”
After racing a quarter mile down
the road, the cars turn abruptly into rn

Parking lot. The reporters are” bafiled

uby the rush and the short'trip but re-
“lieved to be staying near the airport,
They figure they are headed for a
plane from a different’ direction, but

Morales leads them (through another

into a new hold-

maze of corridors al

with, two rooms partitioned off on the
side,
handles. They lock from both sides.

* Morales vanishes, leaving Réimulo’

and El Largo ia charge. Rémulo's

fingertips do push-ups on his desk -
while he looks on, stone-faced. Roth- -

child gets the impression that Rémulo
Ickes to stare at-blank walls more than

~ at people. El Largo, who seems to be a

~ Faxed. Morales fingers his walkie-talkie, °

‘ : Yaelan sets to the phone and starts
fot fumbling for Venezuelan change and
_ her phone numbers, Morales leans up
+ against the wall near the phone. He
. looks amused, body seems to twitch
a little under his suit, aa if he might

, need some exercise.
: Branch and Rothchild keep telling
themselves that Inclan is making a
_ futile gesture, but they admire her.
Branch and Rothchitd watch her lift
the phone from the cradie, but they
Norales in the face, which is probably
‘am inistuke, He stares at her, shakes his

ea ot more Ruts than we do,”
don’t think she has the change or the

_ Whispers Rothchild.”
- Humber, She js nervous, She looks

- head, and hangs up tho phone gently,”

2
te ayo rn ee

notch above Rémulo in the pecking

order, move’ into one of the partitioned: _

offices and stays almost, continuously on
the phone. He reminds the reporters of
his presence from time to time by
loudly sucking phlegm up his long
spiny nose.

After about ten minutes, Branch
starts pacing away from Rémulo
“Goildamn it,” Branch spurts, “1 don’t
think we know enough about Morales
to make him do all this. He’s going to
a lot of trouble to seal us off from
Venezuela, but it doesn’t make sense
that he would go it just because we
know who he is.”

. “Why'not?” asks Inehin,

. “Because,” says Rothchild, ovhat we
already Know is going to come out nye
way if he kicks us out cf the countzy.”
- “3 think maybe Norales is more

’ This whole country is like a tinderbox,

-SIDES. And we go on to say that Basch
ig waiting area -

The doors are metal with no ~
“story like that would reahy serew up

$

woe martes cr

ws. ched ptout what we m: cght find out |
if we ever ret out of his clutches,” ’ 4
says Hranch. “Z think maybe it's the |
fact that ‘this terrorisr: js otyanized
internationally, Hosch moves around on
itlexal passports and has fancy fund-
raising dinners with supposec!y respect~
able people in luts of countries, He's
supported by at least part of a lot of
governments. And this stutT lacks cross
national—Cubons killing Chileans and
a0 forth. Now look at how Venezuela
fits in, It's kind of an entrepét for ev-
erybody on all sides. The rorernmeat is
in a real pickle. It bas to get slong
with the military juntas that have tak-
en over most of Latin America, and it
zlso has to get along with Castro, This”
country is filled with left-wing Chilean
exiles and right-wing Cuban -enlesx |
Letelier is buried here, which is a tilt
td the left, but the pecple who helped
conspire to kill him might well be right ~

“in the DISIP, which is full of Cubans‘ . j
“like Moratcs. President Pérez [Carlos .

Andrés, of Venervela] has got his own- {
little Watergate here, because. his own - 1
government is tangled up with both .
the terrorists and the ‘anti-terrorists. "

The government is making little ges-‘

tures to both sides, trying. to keep the. .,
lid on.*-

“Okay,” Branch continues, “Let’:
assume that Morales is not bootlegging
us out of the country on his own. That ;
seems stupid to me. Let's assume that |
at least the people in the. interior
ministry know whst's coing on, And
Yet’s assume they’re afraid we'll get

-into the country and find = story that . '

foes something like INTERNATIONAL
TERRORIST ORGANIZATION BEADQUAR-

TERED IN VENEZUELA. OPERATIVES MOST-

LY CUBAN, EXILES ‘#1Td CIA AND FSI TIES. ‘
VENEZUELAN GOVERNMENT PLAYING BOTA .

has brought a lot.of Latin ‘governments
around to his position, which is that it's
better to trust each othes. than to trust
the C.LA. Now, what I'm saying is that |

the Venezuelaas, especially if it’s fleshed -
owt. It’s the last thing tha gov Tament
here needs right now.”
“So what leas Morales ont” asks |
Rothehild. a woos

“1 thin! he's on both es," says,
Inclan. .

“I think so; too,” says Branch, “just
like tlie ‘government. Morales is in the
underworld of both sides.”

Inclin thinks for a moment, “There's i
only, one big. problem,” she says, “If {4°
they're so. afraid of a story, like that, + . a
why do they let other reporters stay . . .
‘and just throw us out? Why do they
pick on us?”

“[ don’t know,” Branch sighs.
don’t know much about the correspon- |
dents here, Theyre getting some’ stuff
out, but my impression is t they
cover nine countries and just fy in for
the coups and earthquakes. That still
doesn’t make us so special, But maybe

at

fs

+ we are to Morales. We know him, He

knows Hilda knows a lot about Bosch
and Mrami connections. He knows that
1 got pretty deeply into the CLA.
Cubans. Then he sees us with the proses ¢

—_—



--- Page 15 ---
14-0000

“* begging, pul

cutors, That may have been too much
for him to: take chances with us. I
doa’t know, Maybe he thinks we're:
Cia”

Swords ca the Runaway
El Larga up the three: passports
of Romslo’s desk and points them
towanl the locked.dovr line a batén,
“Vamos,” is all he saya. -
The met:l door is unlocked by EL
ant onte again the DISIP cor-
teye appeacs {rom nowhere. They es
cort tite reporters down another stairs
ease and cat toward an immigration
stall in a large rovm that ls coinpletely-
isolated It is a busy part-of the day‘at
jor airport, but the DISIP keeps
finding these’ empty halls and’ empty
(Fooms to stick the reporters in,
Something about approaching this
“immigratoa stall, which is not atten

* ed. and knowing he. will pass “through:
‘it and grt on an eirplane and’ not and -

Leteijer's murderer starts to galvanize
Branch, There is a tiny: passage to go~
through and: El Largo ‘is -wetioning

is. apartment and he is reiting mad.
The mscderrhe gets, the slower he

twalks, “We can’t just get. on this
~ plane,” ke says to Kothchild.
‘to af least'do som:

complete stop, but
t way down. Moraves

-, insurrection in 2 second, i
- seems: Tnérely. agitated, He is getting i in.
- front of the reporters, pleading and

ing with his arms as if
* they are all connected by an invisible.
“rope.

In ~complete exasperation, ” "he. starts
Sputterine threats, “If you don’t mo’ 1
“shrough here, I am going to use jhe
wo ‘guards go running down
ss the room, apparently to go
the force, which turns out tobe ©

aud per Pan Ain. Inclan, finally “ex:
some pj ranoia herself, Says,

plane, but they wouldn't saci
Venezuelan plai
many of them."
They have been erogging
walk for almost forty minutés f

being fiushed back cut from theic vaca-

_ tions, The buses are stopping at the
+ back ss
_ Branch gets his idea, “In here where

may of the plane. Then

"he tells Rothchild, “But out
“there, in front of all those tourists, we -
ean get some help. Let's fo" Rothchild

-House fence. Rothchild is sitting on the

Well “they could ‘blow us up -on the -

and Branch buaddle with Inclin. They
+ oh the plan ond agree, Then all
t. @ @banlon their shuitty, to the sur
prise of the herders, who have been
pushing all along. Suddenty they see
‘their quarry running o:f in front of
them, El Largo doesn't eatch on right
away, but he knows that whatever the
ftera want to do, it must be thy
wrong thing. Sovhe starts running after
them, yelling, “Stop! Branch and
Rothchild hit the double gelass door with
Inclan ant EB} Largo and the acmy just
behind. They all pour out onto the run-
way to the curious looks-of hundreds
who are lined ue to get c -

ers, screaming: in Spanish and eaeish
that she is a woman reporter whose

Becept hei as a lunatic -
they don't want with:

that lead to the front
“He is sitting down
te clenched to the rails
like a Quahér chained tothe White

steps just below, Branch, and “they a

forceménts; the sword. company, “Tle

men in -brown uniforms have circled

them, and they pull the swords a few
f.

police seem to be pouring out of the

doors ‘and official jeeps ate scréeching

uP ‘and al creed ng of and Romulo has
showed!

@ captain of- the ai iptane,, a “Vene-
lan, comes down the same famp on,
ha’

naa :
. Steps over Branch and goes 1 ‘ight.down -

to the huddle of secret poliée, where the
current brains of the operation, Rémulo -

‘and El Largo, are standing: .The cap-

tain Proceeds to chew them out, tell
hey’ are idiots topull'a sliow
and that. he'wili-not take
is airplane if they

; ‘une on his airplane? --"-»

Et Largo and Rémulo don't” quite

“know how to ‘handle this sudden obsta-*

cle. They get a fet’s-talk-this-one-over-
buddy loo on their faces and go into a
huddle with tke captain. They also de
fer to even higher authority, a beefy
cop named Camargo, who is wearing a
short-sleeve shirt. Cantargo arrives in

‘for
. of thé sword brigade; that he is an

the mbtdle of the scene, louking tike thy
frust a c
There
in pl
from Yy
tachments, frantic jeep drivers, airline
authorities, pilots and ground-crew pero
sonnel, all crowding around to’ watch
or take part in the action. Cama
looks shy ward, thinking under proasur
aod gets his idea. “Why don’t you let
me go with these people?” he nsks the
pilot. “If I take them to Miaml, I guar-
antee there won't be any funny uk
on your. pisne.” | Rothehild thinks

The pilot doggn’t think too much of
Camarfro’s idéa, “Do

that. sounds:
the captain ret

at all these caz3 ond ‘soldiers

tressed officisls—but they don’t Jike the
prospect yf lunch with Ricardo Morales,
Nobédy seems to be running to éall the

American Embassy or any other ont-
quali

side help, so the Blan is a
- failate.” * .

loa:
bers on little scraps of papér—the num-
bers, are of, t editors in Miam friends,

“Salvation “Army coilectors at the race.
track. Only a few of the Passengers ace
tually take the notes, but just to make
‘ure, the DISIP_ people are picking
them off at the higher end of ‘the line.
- Some passengers even go out of their
way to hand over ‘the notes, with an
hi a

with another plan: send one, leave to,

Branch still is hoping he can break the

Morales-logjam and get out'into friend-

ly territory, where his ‘contacts are -
waiting to help him. Inclan speaks the. |.

id seems the most adept

- best Spanish.

at handling jpectors and bureaucrats. ;

‘They. will stay and ‘Rothchild i is chosen’
to leave. Branch reminds -him, in front

tex.
ant father,”.but Rothchild needs no

agement. He instantly calls for

the captain and explains that he- wants |

‘to get on the plane. The cap hes’
tates, then agrees, and Rothchild runs
for the stairs, As he passes Branch and
Inctin, Branch sticks one page of phone

‘numbers in, his pocket and, as ao di-

versionary tactic, clumsily sticks anoth-

er note in hid hand, .thia one in full



--- Page 16 ---
14-0000

. “quickly return, They ‘tell. Rothchil
». very {ciendly tone that his

"there? No. After'o

“say @ praye:

-are frisking Rethehil
is triumphantly confi: y don't
know chat it says “Joe Morgan” on it
Ths name éf the kreat Cincinnati sec
end baseman will go somewhere into the
DISUP files,

Nalfway up athe ramp, Rothehild

that now the DISIP
wants to keep him on the ground. Sev--
eral cops are following him as if they
ad and step him at the
i the plane and
hey are still tole.

and the two cops reach out ait to nik
- him, - then change- their minds and

down on the ground. want a
word with hira atid that he better ot

~ ardess on the way to his:
The’ cops are not. th:
return with another ploy:
+ mot filled out the necessary papers
he must return to an office in
port. “Are you. sure this.isa’
Rothehild asks: “No,-no trick, , Just ,
+8 procedural mation.”
them he-isn't moving an inch until he

 talks'to thé'captain,_

Out his little window, Rothekitd seea*
forthet agitation.on the riaway, They
have brought Up -@ car and they are.
Inclén to

- his.
like a giant windmill, “determined to’ ‘get
all three reporters together—on or off
the plane. The -reporters are equally
determined, to “split up. Branch and -
Jnctén keep telling Camargo that they
will’ not 'move from the runway until
takes off. They want to stay
view of all, the passengers, -
at the goons will grab Koth-

Are.crouched in the “hade,

" ‘arettes, dnd several hundred gawkers -
spreid put in a semicircle like fans ~

sides? N No. He goe: : off into a huddle |
they get in the
of the hot sun?
ises they tan”

changes and several

‘ brown Dlackjacks. ” ‘Branch and: ae .
refuse to move and wave -
_. Gatentatiously at the airplane. ‘The

fons ‘shoVe-and menace but then go off
again, Rémule cones back with his gue
palled, looking, like a crazed assassin.

Camargo soo yanks him back to the -
goor huddle, The plhne starts taxiing |

. gt the jet engines sets off « ‘tremors in

They
‘Rothebild “a -

Rothchild tells -

huddle and say not until :t's off the
ground. Camarge -looks furious and
barks a command to his walkietalhie
man, The plane stops i:nmediately and
sits In the middle of the airstrip. Ca-
r, the reporters
syed by inches
and blulfs, Sees oo for nearly‘an hour.

Camargo Plays Hardball

Branch and Incléa are sprend-engled

against the backdoor cpenings of the
oon ear, facing each other, when the

30 of the paar ens game. The roar

E ranch,
the front seat, They peel off down
runway with ‘cars following. ad
it take the plane to

“it “has to top in Mara-
caibo.” +

_ Beéarch, shivers and “ashe. Anclén to’ ~ ce
translate. the. Spanish to oiake sure he .

heard right,
“1 thought you said it was a > direct
flight to Mi, ” Inclin says, in dis- -

“MIt ty going: iaini, senor: .
“replies Cariargo, “but it is stopping in
_Maracaibo.” > .

The reporters diseuss | vith renewed
horror the fact that Maracaibo is still
in Venezuela; they envision the DISIP
people paying.a call oa Rothchild. Ca.

5 reoway and Camarco saya,
note ~*-You've won. Let's ea” The reporters

wAny suggestions an tho to get rid of ?* Cost

di

“mat Tina at them His Mpa slant in uf .

one airection, and the upper row. of his

front teeth stants in the other, making

an X. Branch thinks Ca: Je

file bis tecth, He inches

pimnte until he is Blmost: ia Teclin's H
iP.

Three hours later, Camargo sammons
the two reporters to his office after
more consultation with Central Ca-
‘racas.:Only one thing bas changed, he

27. Both their visas have -
roxed; they are or |
dered to leave at three-thirty, The re
porters ask why, and Camargo shrugs.

+ Without warning, the session is in-
terrupted vhen one of thi x
eons + trots. ‘in and hands C

i
i
:

gays..he @ lot about the Unit
' States and-walks over to a corner
_ there is a stack of framed: diplomas éa™ 4}
the floor. He Aips through them and
hands Branch 2 dipioma from the U.S.
Army School of Special Warfare. It is -
signed by General Joseph W. Stilwell,

+ Commandant Then he hand. h

ing school for “the
world’s policemen. It has closed after a -
dose of scandal. Branch wonders if all
s have been trained by
would ike to meet their,

causes: ‘an Lids .
editors there have -been. worried about”
Inclia since shé missed her check: in >



--- Page 17 ---
Facas nad lifts it off the grounl with
rage, The embassy Promises to investi-
Bae immehately. Rothchild begins to
reconsider his views on newspaper edi-
tors, ~ .
‘Camargo comes Into the holding room
wearing the loox of a man who has just
accomplished something.
_ “Your visas have been officially con-
fiscated,” he announces,
The, reporters look ot him blankly.

“You have had them all day.”
- “Now they are permaneatly confis:
+ cated,”
“a new Venezuelan seal stamped on each
- one. Over ‘the seals, someone has

. scrawled, “Visa fue revocada.” ‘
Before the reporters i
wre ont what this signifies, Camsi¢o
| gives the order to move out. Te. soya the
, is late. .The soon squad

says, they co
. ‘stopped ten feet outside the airportand ©
‘ashed for their papers: ald. be
- slapped ia prison for thi
\ their passports. For.the first time they

shakes his head wearily and tells Inchin

They follow a triumphant Camargo
Pi

K. :
‘On’ October 24, two days ¢ after the re-
* porters left Caracas,” Deputy Interior

(. Midister Marco Tulio Brunicelli talked -

aa carrying
conform “with national novisy”
that “she was cordially. asked té leave
. the country Ddecausé itis wecessary to
“comply with our. laws." As’ for ‘Branch

ition from the Agency: “If you .

“t don’t help the, good people fight Castro,”
: ‘said one old C. LA, Cuban; “then we have
: to help the bad ories do it, There's noth--
.c ing left but terroriim.” Branch, was
stenned by how F rapidly the ant-CLA.,

. Bre-terrorist: tren had . progressed ix
y years since he had left.
“ sie A. loyalists'‘were now in very
ort supply, The Inst defectors were
‘ ans whose secret historiés stretched
¢ back to the Fifties and Sixties, when
their anti-Communist movement was in

% the American mainstream. The C.LA.
trained the Cubans to work by stealth—
to lie, smuggle weapons, move illegally
and ake bombs

tor calls the Anierican Eribaisy ia Cas.

“What's new about that?” asks Inélan. .

” ave not on solid legal grourd.- Branch -

. they bave lost a round of hardball, -.-

* and was satisfied that he wanted badly
aly.

t strike secretly against Castro tan
&. . Some’of them were “ovticial” tere
torists, who would stoically accept lung
isil sentences rather than reveal a
C.LA, secret, Now they were no longer
official,

Rothchild was back home in the Ev-
erglades, On Monday he ceceived the
first of several, phong calls from a man
identifying himself as a “consultant to
the government of Venezuela.” He

wantal to give: Rothchild some money.

te write about Rottichild’s background,
Very weird, thought Rothchild. He be

gan to worry. that his trip to Caracas”

would follow him:
Press ‘reports from Venezuela quoted
interior, ministry officials in- Venezuela

_ at paying that Ricardo’ Morales “did

‘Rot cause the expulsion of the Ameri-

can jourhalis ” In-an’ official state.

ment on October 26 the mi 2
‘di

It came by messenger -and read like
“

Sherlotk Holmes:
‘ales, and

ee whates
: thel Key ta’ him is something you. already

know. It seems that something ‘he once
told you or knows you know will click
with something’ you would be likely to
hear here; or would reve:
here, that-he dida't want
Branchivent to, see >
“ the’ Assistant U.S. 3ttoi ry in. charge .
of ‘the Letélier investigation. ‘Propper |
wanted to “know about the ‘Veneauela
trip because he was thinking of going
. there himself. ‘rhe leads pointed there,
he said. He ayked questions about the
Cuban terrorists. Branch outlined what
“he knew, He took a: ‘reading of Propper -

to solve the case,” Brainc
that they” were. both. x
heads, His worries SkyFock

Mo asked to see a copy of The

, Successful -phone calls around the Jus- .

tice! Departmént and said he would get
these fewspapers from the ibrary of.

the police stati
robbery and find its phone. disconnected.’
je recovered and offered to do: any.

to Venezia. :

“I've only got one major reservation,”
he said, “and that is the informant
problem. You have to rely on the F.B.1.
-and the CLA. to investigate, and the
fact is that most of -the suspects and
likely witnesses are oli
P.B.I, men of some

at the Agency aren‘t-sbout to sdérifice - {
theif security and secrecy to help solve: |

‘The Wey to Sis

- Cubana de Aviacién bombing.)

CLAD and

-e anid it could he handted. The

Pre
vple on the case would ari

Fut,

their own mothers if they had ty The

tertorista And threatened tu kill an

FB uyent. The Iurcau bad two hun- -

dred agents of the case. It was the
bizeest thing i. tha WILL 7

“What about the Agency?” asked
Branch, “Look, J don't think the CLA.
had anything to do with these murders,
but the terrorists are using theie old
GLA, connections in more ways than
one. The Agency is in a bind. It has
‘created a-monster, The whole world of
seercts in Miami has -turned upside
down. But I'll bet those ‘old pros oi

‘A murder.”

tion, reams of stuff i
asked chim to test it, “Ask

> _named-THerminio: Diaz.

- ght
‘atid Killed in Cuba, Now, if the Agency

doesn’t have enything on that, they're
just giving you a-lot of smoke.” (Po-
sada 18 the” Cuban-detéctive from the
-DISIP-now held by the DISIP for

ropper agrced. (On a later visi

Propper would -Say- he way getting Pp

Agéncy cooperation but declined to give
Braneh'any details.)

On November 4, the State Depart-
ment responded to ‘Branch’ 's request for
8 position statement on the Venezuelan
expulsion, which the U.S. Erabassy in

Caracas had been investigating. A ~
State Department representative read a:

ortion of a press briefing as. follows:

‘what’s the State Department going to

do about it? © --- : .
A: He described ‘the ‘dealings he a

‘at Maiquetia Airport when

. “they arrived there-last. week. I'm not:
“going to discuss deta’

of what: he said.
im tod

rom the State Jepartmenit called ba
“Jz, Branch,” she said, “I'm afraid

there's been a big mistake. That brief. |

ing that was just read to you does not

constitute the department's public posi-
. tion, It is.a guide!

e.”
. “What is 3 guideline?”

“hts a policy draft setting out what |

the people here are authorized to'say in

respons
there is-what we would have said had

- we been asked, But it is not what we

have said publicly. We have no record
of being asked on the record, although
some reporiers may have inquired pri-
vately, in which case we would have
responded aceording to the guideline.”
“So what is the State Department's
position, then?”

: What. did! he (Branch)' say and .

others had with the Venezuelan".

to inquiries, What you have”

we



--- Page 18 ---
14-0000

4 tr woman went on to =Y, in’ so >

‘ many words, that State was holding

z steady at an expression of cvacern,
That afternoon, Branch met with

~ Froppar and the senior F.BL agent on

ixent repli
of the Bureau’s.-~7 physical safety.
nA at furthermuce the F.2L

Rg
‘
‘


--- Page 19 ---
14-0000

—_ we .

eo, Fos’ se3e— .
Loo + Pe IN
PARLE SEC THs we a pl. er Sty exes” ~ Sa: os DY “2 3 hoe
aN, a _ ADMIN IN(ERWAL USE Tomi pads
Pe eee een “ _ |. ADH! i bu e oN | eee

an aot cain scorn eens

[Diels ai

T 650185 _ €1ag26 oe

et SeRVIEE HOS Up/tie an ;
-ONS STAFFCLIATSON. GROUP ATING: ery, SAND

_ REFERENCE: 1S wade 9: EL CoN THIS: ‘pate. HEREWITH are NAMES “FOR

- --NAMECHECKS ; RESULTS SHOULD. BE DIRECTED TO IRS WINNER, THIS DIVIS: -}

(634-5862 OR 5212 SECURE). ALL INDIVIDUALS. ARE THOUGHT TO HAVE

BEEN BORN IN‘CUS& AND TO BE CURRENT MEMBERS OF 7H CUBAN EXILE
2 ar ae oe

Sera HA CORENEO 5 9-41—

SATENP A, ORLAT 100 7221-38
AL ANCOs HUMSEARTO ee AT coy
4

HECTOR. ALBERTO, 7-31
AAUL ALBERTO 7-9-3
38.

avo" 4: 28 46 $e: PU pre “a7 .
9 GUS 0 \a-beaae — APY oa
LTO FRANCISCO 6-4-42 2 nes FB)
fo og AEGRION 6° 28-25° ~ eter Ze Le FB,
Op . WEeesec et UlS Ac SERTO.7-24+41. ~ fofer.
7 4 -  Webcasyeov VERSE SEDO ABNACLG i154 — fer & eo!
oes . Seis 2S 3 roy EUs ANTONY RAFAEL $1-27~ “58 — fH
so - LAE RAM jeiao —, — fe -
i ff GEBES+BES' 4490 3-26-34 Eo, De DE eh
- HER, ~UGLEL BRDRES 11-16"45 ~ hep He FB,
‘ oO apMiNn INTE RAL USE GRY”

bal | | IO l- FETIAS



--- Page 20 ---
2
REPRODUCTION OY OTHER Tan .
unten OFOCE 1S PaSweITEO

NON AGENCY MESSAGE mud

EL 1AS-NA2T Ke JOSE 3-194
ENCING 54 PEDRO 4°27
HM aNUE

20. =A) BR. Se
AEE KN As: pn ok:
3, ERS « Mice rg re

9. Sites Memié

. feANiNced RAUL adoro &-
MERN ANGE 2 RAMI RE Zs. VAL ENT!
“IRQUIERDO*DIAZ NESTOR 3-20-36 pede Eh er a
NEZ-ESCOBEDO, GASPAR EUGENI jo Redo 2. EBL

JUNC OSA-PERA RALPH 1°15-41 st aden aes
1 A RAF REL - SONBALER ‘ “FAL: ata” ae



--- Page 21 ---
14-0000

°
#0aM wyoe
rrtwie 1
ae fe

CABLE SEC OsDEN or ventas cons

PERSON UNIT NOTED.

REPRODUCTION ‘BY OTHER THAN
ISSUING OFFICE (B PROMIBITED

tN 184747

LY 596336 E14536 PAGE €1-01 .
yO ; TOR11213332 FEB 77 CARA 32198

“$-E OR E Tt 1213262 Fee 7 STAFF : an

ae CARACAS 52198
“to1 ERIORITY DIRECTOR, | : _ _ oe
cininre KMSTONE |” Oe emp in
Frees CARACKS 32243 (HvC#7589) » (or7itis)

ae Pyrs bmg AS SADIR WAS UNIMPRESSED NITH EITHER IMPORTANCE. .

nes i entneatiastsne
vet

"OF REF INFO oR URGENCY IN GETTING IT INTO VENEZUELAN GOVT.
HANDS. HE THINKS REPORT MAY REPRESENT MORE BRAGGADOCIO ON PART

OF RICARDO MORALES THAN ACTUAL PLAN OF ACTION AND HE PRIVATELY

deen ge!

FEELS EXCITEMENT IN DEPARTMENT OVER THIS SORT OF THING IS BIT OF
TEMPEST IN A TEAPOT. NONETHELESS, TO DO OUR PART, HE ASKED STATION
“10 GIVE GIST OF REF TO WKSCARLET=9 AT NEXT LIAISON MEETING :

SCHEDULED. FoR 11 oR 12 FEBRUARY,
“FILED 2049265923) 2. ANPDET, _

SECRET - el- 2F5 923

; RECORD COPY Wl Pet 727



--- Page 22 ---
14-0000

OUTGOINC~"ESSAGE

soma, conven vot omy i .
omF oo oo Oo G0 @ oO a ; a 4 ers
SECRET , se

88004 meted OATCS ‘Oate hat ony cm . et b8008 OTF ERENCA eEEE
STAFF <7 422837 DIRECTOR th 2 eg
. woe “DISSEM BY:
7 conr: L AXXO nro: me S, PCs | T; 9 cous P
b sernto PER
f Sra lee
. : o

TO: PRIORITY CARACAS. ¥ so . a
WNINTEL INTEL KMSTONE, w.. : a Ne _
oO” a

be ON 4 FEB. THE ACTING. ‘DEPUTY FOR ARM: IN" ‘STATE TN@UIRED RE

THE - ‘POSSIBILITY AND’ FEASTSTLITY. OF PASSING GIST OF REF INTEL. 10"

, APPROPR TATE REP OF VENEZUELAN GOVERNKENT ON AN URGENT BASIS. ¥.

2. ‘ HEADQUARTERS HAS AGREED TO FORWARD REQUEST. TO STATION. WITH. as

_ SUGGESTION: THAT THE AMBASSADOR ‘BE CONSULTED AND THAT HE MAY WISH TO “ a ON
HAVE- THE EMBASSY PASS THE INFORMATION DIRECTLY. TO AN “APPROPRIATE - ’ a

VENEZUELAN OFFICIAL - “AS COMING FROM PERSONS ouTSIDE ‘OF VENEZUELA. ¥
3. PLEASE ADVISE ACTION TAKEN. e : ,
“4. FILE: 2a1- o2esi23- €2 INPDET.d

Bo Ber ageeres

: EO : a GRAZ.
tr: .G/LA/PNC _AC/UA/OPS - J. MATHEUS {DRAFT} - ‘
: ext: 3033° 7 ar. . : .
. : ms gy. . C/LA/RR - L.E. BORING {DRAFT}
po, eV a : Teds DESMOND {DRAFT
Stith ae C/LA/PNC
aurcengestone oomeae

amu | RECORD COPY | 20 2 tmroer
. . - CL BY: nnzace



--- Page 23 ---
eon 08

SL eiénae EBew 9 send cory ries
Penso@egit activito as 5 25 ES B00 fia,
| pane epmene bed D om
:  tado jb \
tee, a r[ADDO/Ds CI 4x CA 4s CA/SOG 4s STAs SIA/ICs ae
f i CS/ITC W. , -
PS ybss a ag tee TW 77s hots
i , “TOR 2620552 FEB 77 F 2 4
i $2 C RE T 2620322 FEB 77 INTEL DEA t
SG BO gase camacas. 32n4s HWE za *
woe PRIORITY DIRECTOR, INFO paroatty Larerant :
7 TEL INTEL KHSTONE. ae
SIeDAtAt BRWAMOO FOR SOURCE DESCRIPTION FOR WKDIETs2, SOURCE
i , PARA Z HKDIET/HKCIET@5 DIRECTLY, SOURCE PARAS ¢ AND
oe i Se WKDEETAWKDIET@2 DGRECTLY.. NOT FOR LIAISON, |
, OD O2JECTIVE! Jui. No INDEX, FILED 201-0205925,
° }. (NOTES SHOWN TO AMSaSSADOR AND Fal aT CARAGAS, ) b roo
. A. en 2351534 pe rs
i FILEDS eezosee KKK 7 wo a
: ;
~~ _aTED, coments. LIFTER CABLE SENT.>

2d, - PPS 923

: : . sEcCRET

; [-RecoRD COPY | BAIT

é


--- Page 24 ---
14-0000

wwe SECREI (When Paiog try . : am

a |g PRIORITY
Intelligence Information Cable 27 my 27784b
WARNING NOTICE »
SENSITIVE NTELLIGENCE sour ‘CES NP METHODS BaowveD a
roc PAGE 1 OF 3 PAGES . :
s/OAY $8719 FBI "SECUR TENS’ GSS FAA(RCS-20)

SSS oF Eewtse 2 Cr wm oer dneeae trees pia cle Icnadule of EO 11652 Exemption
OPERATIONS FuRT HE HER DISSoe aT LON AND USE OF THIS INFORMATION SUBJECT
> TO CONTROLS STATED AT BEGINING AND END OF REPORT
THIS 1S AN INFORMATION REPORT, NOT FINALLY EVALUATED INTELLIGENCE :
OTE TORRDB- '335/0134b-27 .

SECRET we
: . ost 4 FEBRUARY 297?

- “REPORT class SEC R E T WARNING NOTICE*SENSITIVE INTELLIGENCE
E gourges ave He tTHODS INVOLVED~-NOT RELEASABLE TO. FOREIGN NATIONALS-

NOT RELEASABLE To CONTRAS ‘TORS OR CONTRACTOR/CONSULTANTS=« . : i
ae DISSEMINATION AND ex TRACTION OF INFORMATION CONTROLLED BY ORIGINATORS. 7 "

COUNTRY? . VENEZUELA.
Dor [LATE JANUARY <3 FESRUARY 1977 ey oe a
; SUBJECT: Cro ssisue ATTemPT ey RICA RCO MORLES. To GAIN THE RELEASE:
ge CUBAN EXILE LEADER ORLANDO BOSCH BY FORCE
aca: VERE ZUELA, CARACAS (4 FEBRUARY 1977) FISLD NO. HVC=7589.
SOURCE! Sz= S£LOW, - : -
te SOURCE CF PARAGRAPH 2: 4 CUBAN EXILE WHO MAINTAINS CLOSE

CONTACT WITH CTHER EXILES. HIS RELIABILITY HAS NOT BEEN ESTABLISHED,

2.. iN LATE JANUARY 3677 RICARDO MOR & a & S$ NAVARRETE, a
‘  CUBANEXILE wit 1s AN OF FICTAL GF. THE VENE 2UELAN EIRECTORATE FOR THE .
OF IN NTELL ‘Igenee ano, PREVENTION (Dis Py SAIS “THAT: HE IS

‘INS TG GET CUBAN ExILE LEatER ORaNBS BOSCH OUT OF VAIL

“pHE VENE

t

: UELAN GOVERMENT, MORE Les. “SAIS, “INTENDS To TRY
a AND. CONVICT BOSCH OF CHERSES IN CONNECTIGN WITH THE 6 GOTOSER 1976 .
“7. BOMBING or a cus ane ALALISER ano INTENDS-79 USE BOSCH AS A SCAPEGOAT, oa
, NTLY ENLISTING THE SUBPORT OF UNe. :

: si CRET



--- Page 25 ---
14-0000 “g

rou 200078 Peeviovs
eas 3007 SPOOL SS

it 37783 moa
torn D8-335/0334b-77
WARNING NOTICE : oO 2 3 :
. SENSITIVE INTELLIGENCE SOURCES AND MET! Hops INVOLVED PAGE or PAGES
SECRET FURTHER DISSEMINATION AND USE OF THIS INFORMATION SUBJECT TO
: CONTROLS STATED AT BEGINNING ANO ENO OF REPORT. . ee
telassinestion) -~ . tea

. : SPECIFIED CUBAN EXILES TO CARRY. OUT HIS PLANS Ta GAIN BOSCH'S RELEASE,
Tee so , OS0uRCE COMMENT. MORALES. DD. NOT. EXPLAIN. WHAT TYPE oF FORCE WOULD:

a <i. BB USED To GAIN BOSCH's RELEASE, MORALES 1S AN UNSTABLE INDIVIDUAL AND .

‘IS CAPABLE OF USING FORCE TO GAIN-HIS ENDS: v
3. source cr PARAGRAPHS 4 "AND 5s a VENE2UE! LAN Waite A , WIDE”

VARIETY OF contacts AMONG VENEZUELAN SECURITY OFFICIALS. HIS REL IABILETY.
HAS NOT BEEN ESTABLISHED, <* . .
4, ON 3 FEBRUARY 1977 MORALES SAID-THAT HE INTENDED TO LEAVE”

“VENEZUELA FOR MIAMI FLORIDA, LATER THAT DAY. MORALES SAID THAT HE

EXPECTED ‘To GE IN THE UNITED STATES FOR ‘APPROXIMATELY ONE WEEK,
(SOURCE COMMENT? THE REASON FoR His! TRIP 18 NOT KNOWN) ~~.

5. “MORALES: CONTINU gs to RECEIVE HIS DIsiP SALARY DESPITE AN |
EARLIER SCANDAL CONCERNING HIS DISIP status. (FIELD COMMENT?

“FoR aN EARLIER REPORT ON “MORALES SEE ve ~7'54 8; “TDF IRDB=325//14772* 76 5-
UNDETERMINED RELIABILITY»?

OF MIDeNOVEMBER 19764.3

ROM ANGTHER SOURCE. oF”

MORALES aS RECENTLY BENSIVE. MENT IN A FASHIONABLE 6

“AREA GF CARACAS.

“SALARY, : 4
Su PIE ud DISSEMi Ewaagsy, Fer at cARACAS, ee aoe

mo
a
or
a

Tee abRNING NO


--- Page 26 ---
14-00000

ni

Be APE TE A, A tkeges tenner tk mete enna

Lot Nae AMG en eres Maan ments Seweeenane meso tae :
mis meena anes ehtnaatrentan het tne 8 Fann dee why

SS" 3007, SHOE serous ~ a
_. wed oat fot G
. . . in 2778S
tora DB-F1S/0L34L- 7?
WARNING NOTICE ©
SENSITIVE INTELLIGENCE SOURCES AND METHODS INVOLVED pace 3 oF 3 PAGES
SECRET FURTHER DISSEMINATION AND USE OF ‘THIS INFORMATION SUBJECT TO.

CONTROLS STATED AT BEGINNING ANO END-OF REPORT.
telassificstion)

_ SOURCES AND METHODS INVOLVED--NOT RELEASABLE TO FOREIGN NATIONALS=
NOT RELEASASLE TO CONTRACTORS OR CONTRACTOR/ CONSUL TANTS==DISSEMENATI ON

AND” ‘EXTRACTION oF INFORMATION CONTROLLED BY “ORIGINATORS,

Cassi FrEs BY RE CORDED REPORTING OFFICER, xGds~2, .

ADVANCE copy TRANSMITTED TO: STATES, DIAs ARMY. NAVY. AIR» JCSo NSAy SUS, TREASURY +

- CTA/OPSCENs SS/ID. FBI. IgnS-DDA.FAA-

sECRET

8



--- Page 27 ---
14gp0000

vue a q Er EATEN Sr ge one OE MOET i
‘
i

DISPATCH |... fo peewee

. . bettas ited
_.__Chicf of Station, Ca j
pee. |
| Jat CARD IQ i
Fat ‘
Chief, Latin Ameri: i
ea ;
R a Mo Lay. t

WARNING NOTICE-SENSITIVE INTELLIGENCE SOURCES AND METHODS INVOLVED i

. ‘

1. The information provided below is taken from a Santo
Domingo Station liaison report transmitted to Headquarters under
HDCA-11074, dated 29 November 1976. The information dated 29
August 1976 was received by the liaison service from one of its
agents assigned to Miami, Florida. It is being sent to you for
information only. All information below was reportedly stated
in testimony at the trial of the Cuban terrorist Rolando Otero
in Jacksonville, Florida, and Antonio Gonzaléz had obtained -
immunity from prosecution. The declarations ‘he ‘made were cor-
roborated by Cubans Ciro Orizondo and Manuel Revuelta, former.
cohrades of Otero in the Frente” de Liberacion Nacional Cubano

(FLNC).

2. According to Antonio Gonzalez, there have to be in
Miami up to $00 pro-Castro agents operating; that in a supposed -
plot to kill Fidel Castro in Venezuela, there had been with him
and Rolando Otero, a Cuban named Ricardo Morales and infiltrating
into the affair, he tried to frustrate the plan. Gonzalez also —
said that Morales, supposedly worked for the "CIAin the Congo"
and actually is an agent of the Government of Venezuela, used ~ po
“to- investigate those Cubans who enter and exit from Venezuela. | |
Gonzalez also sdid that in reality, Morales is a Castro: agent.

Distribution:
Orig & 2 COS, Caracas

_ E2 TMPDET *
_ CL BY 007255.

Int. Dist:
1 - Chrono
1 - IP

CFRIt } oR

RL facae tee

bet OF é. “ eh



--- Page 28 ---
x Call, hi! 5 F272
Co tite calle bled | Wig 9?
BO. Site catele tiled 22 Yuv.>?

So Stile ede bile 22 m7?

or mee emer ne:
tye



--- Page 29 ---
D7 OTCWAENT EXTIACT ; a oo a)

_ THE FULL AWINS PVFOQMATION SWICEIMING THE SUQSECT VE THES 201.
BISSTE® HAS REEN EXT ACTED FOTM ANITHE? CFFICTAL 99 FILE. ee
PESSONS PEQFARMING NAME T2ACES ARS CAUTIANED THAT THE DOCH
MENT FRA WHILTY THES EXTRATT WAS PREPAGEN CONTAINS ADDITIANAL ”
THEOQMATICN OERTATNING TT THE SHBJECT AND SHOULD 3E 2EQUESTED. |
FEM LO/FILES es _.

075-058-910
CARA=33792
_ 2? JUL 77.
‘AvC-07716
Pa

_? 1-62%5923_
SEX

— LOC VENE. FQIMFI OFF TCTAL TWF OLIECTORATE _
FIO SEIVICES OF INTELUTCENSE AND PREVENTION.
“/DISTOS, “WARNED MARS TF CODADINATED HINTTED
_ PEVOLUTIONARY JIGANTZATIIN /COIIZS, GUSTAVO
CASTILLE AND FRANK CAST29 1701-0742365/ PF.
OTST REORESSTIY AGATYST CUBSANS (IN VENES

S nae, 08 SED 77



--- Page 30 ---
14-00 g00

secret
~~
eee _... 00 DOCUMENT _EXIRACT |
“TRE FCLLOWING INFCRPATICN CONCERNING THE SUBJECT OF THIS 202° al
COSSIER HAS BEEN EXTRACTED FROM ANUTHER CFFICIAL DO FILE.
PERSCAS PERFGRMING NAME: TRACES ARE CAUTICAEO THAT THE COCU- : cee eee
MEAT FRCM WHICH THIS EXTRACT WAS. PREPARED CCATAINS ADDITICNAL a

“_ INFIRNATICN PERTAINING 10

: TRE SUBJECT AND SHOULC BE RECGUESTEC
FROM IP/FILES. ;

“7 MORALES, @1CAROO_NAVARRETTE.
" 208-028£923_-

“ENTEREC LSA LATE 60. RECRUITED AS RADIO.
_OPERATC2 AND MB2_ OF PARAMIL.ETARY LWFILTRA
' ‘vER USEC



--- Page 31 ---
sSsaes SECRET a0

STAFF

ACTIONS LAwB (081) INFO? FILE, VR, Clad, EPS/EG=2, IP/OMS-2, ODPD-D,

SE-B, SIA, SIA/FL, €28/n)

Stew wow eewoe enero wetaencece

ee ee ee ee re erry

78 0207450 7 PAGE 001 : IN 0207050
: TOP: 1120302 JAN 78 CARA 35189

Meee e ene n nnn ene n een eeee nnn n et eseee men eenen en ew enn enetnenenenn nce nneetenceanane

SEC RET 1120052 JAN 78 STAFF

CITE CARACAS 35189

___T02_ DIRECTOR, eo: _ SO oe. -
WNINTEL RNMUM CKLEG, WRSCARLET : ; a

to : 4
REFS: A, DIRECTOR 190358. .
: B, CARACAS 35019 TOO OLD
C, . CARACAS 33784 TOO OLD

- 2, STATION Lratsbs OFFICER MET WITH SUBJECT OF 201¢
0952786. AS PART OF ASSESSMENT OF SUBJECT'S KNOWLEDGE OF SOVIET
PERSONNEL AND ACTIVITIES IN VENEZUELA, AND TO DETERMINE HER
POTENTIAL AS POSSIBLE UNILATERAL SUPPORT ASSET
AGAINST SOVIET AND SLOC TARGETS, .

2. “DURING pIsucssioxs, “SUBJECT MENTIONED THAT ON SEVERAL
QCCASIONS IN PAST SHE HAD NOTED, ON SURVEILLANCE REPORTS OF
CUBAN EMBASSY THAT A VEHICLE BEARING LICENSE PLATE REGISTERED
TO MINISTRY OF INTERIOR ENTERED wiTH SOME FREQUENCY, HOWVER,
ATTEMPTS TO IDENTIFY THE PERSON TO mHOM VEHICLE ALLOCATED
- ALWAYS WERE RETURND TO HER WITH INSTRUCTIONS TO FORGET THE
ENTRY AND TO STOP MAKING REFERENCES TO IT IN HER REPORTS,

SHE FINALLY WAS ADVISED THAT THE "CAR wAS USED BY (AT. THAT TIME)
COMISARIO RICARDO M O.R AL E S NAVARETTE (201-0285923).4 AND
THAT SHE SHOULD REFRAIN FROM MAKING FURTHER INQUIRIES, OR FORM
INCLUDING THAT CICENSE “PLATE IN- HER REPGRTS, SHORTLY mc
“AFTERWARDS, SUBJECT mAS REMOYiD FROM RESPONSIBILITY OF
MONITORING AND . ANALYZING CUBAN ACTIVITIES IN VENEZUELA AND.
RESTRICTED TO THE SOVIETS AND SOVIET ‘BLOC,

~35-- FILE: “2orso9s2 Tees 20120285023, E2, wpe.

| CROSS ILE COPY FOR

201-2259 23

DO KOT DESTROY

ENO OF MESSAGE SECRET



--- Page 32 ---
“OUTGOING MESSAGE

srana, contenuse oon
cent 0 Qo it} 5 oO it}
selcret /3-2
wenes08 manbune moncaroe ower onoue em scaseaoe eerandnca savene
peieasz CIA 233734 . ;
a com fede Wro: me Wiad, UeSac/10, ver, pe OISSeM BY: fy
7 - , . SLES . O serie v0 Pen So?
O womss # /3 za

Tor FEDERAL BURE au OF TAVESTIGATION. ¥
‘ aTTenTioN: « TWTELLIGERCE DIVISION ’ .
“SECREt vaRWiue NOTICE - SeRSETIVE wTELLIGENCE SOURCES AND METHODS

“ms VOLVED//i0 FOREIGN pIssen ¥

1
;  CIR-BUL/ONRRN-77-¥ | ;
> suauect: RICARDO ANISAL MORALES WAVARRETES FOREIGN COUNTER -

, HaTELLTGENCE ~ VENEZUELA ¥
REF: FeT CASLE DATED eeba0sz HOV 225 Sang “SUBJECT y 7 _ ; me . 4
“%. YOU ARE ADVISED. i “RESFONSE re THE REFERE: CED QUERY, THAT -. ., _ .
ft

THE CENTRAL THTELLIGERCE AGENCY HAS NO OPERATIONAL INTERE: sre Iw THe at

A2OVE SUBJECT.

xEnPT FRon

Uae CLASSIFIED av RECORTED. REPORTING OFFICER:

*

En scRAL, PECLASSTPICATION SCONE yLe’ E. 6. 24s 52 EXEMPTION: CATEGORY
$3 {ce}. INPOSSTALS TO. DETERMIN oo DATE OF AUTOMATIC DECLASSIFICATION- i. ’

ICABLE SEC: “PLEASE. PRovive & copy To. IP? FOR FILING: i 203-285%23

ve . . ose coe ;

ORIG: . * .
UNIT: ~
ext: > *e
’
- ’ ,
esse ormeas cocapmaree orm eee ayresemicatng overca®
E2 IMPDET

ores .
~ ‘ eT : _ el BY:


--- Page 33 ---
, ORIG: OUEN FAUST 9%"

VUILUING NESSAGE

. ° “BiGwat CenTee Use os
ore ana eae OS
OMF oO Qo G 13] o ij
secrtt .
008408 menme oA . eave Ts Ono ome (0d e4068 MereRaRce ER
. re CIA
CONF: "wpo: eres B34. g ~~ bissem Br:
: : O smvmto PER

ORIG: LA/CO/CI {FAUST XU52S}3 COORD: IC/LA/CO & et
CALA/VCE/V LAMORI}» PCALA/SR CDISTEFANODS AUTHE C/LAD CUARRENDSS
REF? C/PCS/LSH/ID ¢ LE DAN, de ‘

OATE: 3c NOVENBER ast

DIUAL COL oe

wert: LA/CO/CI :
Ext: 4328
- Le. (heal Law
. Lote 1 t Mee
C/PCS/LSN/ID BC/LA/SR fot KE

atuaasne groan
ontemeanon oe ° = = + IMPDET

eee sae aaa

“SECRET... . ; ee



--- Page 34 ---
14-0000

enOle ane cosstw Ore rea! bs ¢ ¥ AETRODYCTION OF OTHER
fs oe . Tse sine © c18 PROM

. 26 oe oe & 8
re SoA SL (=A 2 8 49 8
rere, corte’ ee ek errs
aE
Fee,

' § Sfoces—— ~-SU AES FAGE Os-81. IN 477336 ;

i TURE ZELS252 NOY 77 CARA 34827 ‘

| SECRET ES13572 NOV 77 STAFF 7 : .
SITE CakacaS Seeg7—— oo re
Tos FRioarTy DinecroR, 7 ne
WNIRTEL RNHUM. . ae ne Se

REFs DIRECTOR 130272 - ~
Q - ; . i
- THE FBI IS. FREE 70 AR TRE ST NGRALES $ - WE HAVE NO ORS .

4
-F
INTEREST, BELIEVE iT POSSI3SLE HE May CLAIM RELATIONSHIP
. - e
aiTs RIACTION WHICH, OF course, IS SIMPLY NGT TRUE, oo, . : '

Ze FILES 201-8958534, £2 IMPDET

il. PPEGIS
SECRET

AL WA 77



--- Page 35 ---
14-0000

OUTGOING MESSAGE

soma, CovTee vse os : see
aos o we heed om Me
onF oO o o o 98 6° *9°
SECRET 78-/ .
watson mnowoo moceree ference ono easesos menwenrce senees
~ STAFF Braz DIRECTOR , 130272 .
: WA O won pissem ay: C£64
conP: LAE Info: FILet Lsafre, YS 0 ae ‘
ely, LEC 2 ~ 0 mere PER ;
Donn §8#¢

TO: PRIORITY CARACAS.¥ |
UNINTEL RNMUN YS

"REF: DIRECTOR [xl ¥ 1308 a7 7
po 0. -
: a. ‘Suavect REF IS LIKELY TO BE ARRESTED BY THE Fel FOR FAILURE,

TO REGISTER UNDER THE FOREIGN AGENT REGISTRATION ACT. WITH YOUR
CONCURRENCEs UE PLAN, TO TELL THE BUREAU THAT WE HAVE NO OPS INTEREST
IN MORALES. PLS ADVISE-¥" : :

2. FILE: 201- ~Dasos3¥. E2 INPDET.d
ORIG: AC/LA/VCE CAMORI X103338 AUTH: PCS/LSN AKUANTS REL:
AC/LA/VCE LANORIF.#

: sSIG CENTER: PLS INSERT DIR NUMBER : ot

paTe: 33 NOVEMBER 1977 Se ae
"OR ALBERT/AMORT=CK vo 2 IM AEE 925.
a Be ee ag
woe Lo tf . . .
ZLASVCE ;  cncemarane comma mre ehh cae

E2 IMPDET

RECERD COPY | CL BY po 7Eb7



--- Page 36 ---
14-0000

OUIGUING MESSAGE

stoma, conven ves! ey
onF oO i) o o 0 fr)
SECRET: ; fo-/ .
ee ee eae om + mpeeecd REFERENCE EER
~ 517332 DIRECTOR 13027,
cone: AB INFO: PILE “eseHe : Batten
LG ae O mmnero PER Sef”
. . ; O ome # 432 .
TO: CARACAS.¥ . OO

GNINTEL RNMUN Y-
i 1. FOLLOWING IS TEXT OF FBI CABLE DATED 22 NOVEMBER 2977.

a “qurs INFO IS FOR ADDRESSEE BACKGROUND ONLY» NOT 10 BE ‘DISCUSSED on
. - ; OTHERUTSE DISCLOSED OUTSIDE RTACTION: KITHOUT PRIOR “Hes” AUTHORIZATION? ¥

mt . 7, ste CENTER? PLS TRANSMIT ATTACHED FBI CABLE = IN 9730b0 mo
BEGINNING WITH "RICARDO ANIBAL MORALES NAVARRETES FOREIGN. - mal ;
; “Pp. ONO FILE. E2 IMPDETed : a
BESRRBERERESBBORIG: La/vcEsy {MORGAN XL725}% AUTH! PCS/LSN {KUHNDS
REL: AC/LA/VCE {ANORI}.# '

COPY ATTACHED

DATE: 23 NOVENBER 297700 se —
Ul. onic ‘RUSSELL “MORGAN CK ae
UME LA/VCEZY :

‘ — 2. {MPDET
Ct BYon77

aoe



--- Page 37 ---
14-0000

=.
0 ‘ Son?
ce0.d oa2 sete one ~~ satay a), -3 ey
. . {-" “ao REPRODUCTION BY OTHER T
i s E ia re € T J 4BBUING OFFICE 18 PROWIE:
PEON? BOTS _ ~
AZ ¢ LFV 4 oe
T csress 7 e)az36 Pace C1 TN 358241
: ‘T9Rt 2618522 yuk 77 CARA 33796
; ‘ . . 5
$2 CR ET 28,8322 YUL 77 STAFF 7 wiedere) OF
i ne 7S-5-
. crve canactS 33796 ; 2
a ae fnzbra Te DIRECTOR. . ; Aa SSG
i wy IN TL RYBAT MHSPIKE KKBOXER - ov _F-7
t — : > aot
; EPSt A, CAR ADAS. 33798 Gq . .
;  REPSE Ay B59OSS7 -
j 3. CARACAS. 33 3793 tHVC=7716)TN 35705)
i . .
+ it. FURTHER DEVELOPMENTS SINCE REFS!
: A. WKDIET=5-REPURTS THAT ON 24 JULY WKTANGOe2 STATED 7
4 THaT, WITH PRESIDENT PEREZ/ BACKING, HE 1S DECLARING WAR ON
a CySAn EXILES AND IF ANYTHING UNTOWARD HAPPENS) WE WILL 2 0D
re ree mao ‘BATH FROM NEW YORK TO CARACAS." HE ALSO MENTIONED

aS aDDIT 1ONAL “IMPLIED THREAT THAT@® CUBAN SUPERTHUGs RICARDO
MGR ALEX NAVARETIE, HAS: BEEN FULLLY RETNSTATED IN- DIsiP.
. Be INFLUE NTIAL LOCAL CUBAN EXILES ASE IN SOMEWHAT”
OF: aN UPROAR OVER WHAT THEY REGARD AS POTENT 1aL, CAMP AI GN oF -

REPRESSION: In VeNz2UELA AND.-ARE TRYING TO ENLIST” SUPPORT oF” _—_

‘OT COPEL CPPOSITION. PARTY. AND EX-PRESIDENT BETANCOURT,
_ . STAUNCH ANTITCASTRO-COMMUNIST, 10 OFFSET MOVES OF PRESIDENT
Aon PEREZ Hay: THEY CONSIDER To BE IN SED WITH CASTRO.

COPEL mAS ALLEGEDLY COME OUT FULLY -IN SUPPORT OF LOCAL CUBAN

mye
“4

SECR


--- Page 38 ---
14-00000

<7

THe ® 71

Tovai comes ane
WSBUING OF rice se eROMrOL

a0€ SEC Os¢u OF nee

EON UNE N

T 247813 - ET AZS6 PAGE €2 . TN $56141

TOR?2618522 JuL 77 CARA . 33796
i \

EXILE COMMUNITY! SETANCOURT HEAS NOTIFIED “Trem THAT HE IS

n

| STUDYING THE SITUATIGN BEFORE REPLYING.
|g AMBASSADOR MET PRESIDENT PEREZ FCA AREAKFAST
MORNING 28 JULY. NOTHING WAS MENTICNED ASOUT CUZAN EXILE a —
; SITUATION, Be, ;
2. KHAT WE COULD HAVE aS BASIS oF THIS wa ae SITUATION 1S CUBAN
FORGERIES OF LETTERS BFROM GOSCH TO BRIN PRESSURE ON CUBAN EXILE
F COMMUNITY. IN VENEZUEGA wake REMAINS ALMOST TOTALLY ANTI“CASTRO®
IT I$ INTERSTING TO NOTE LETTERS PASSED Gy CUaAN AMBASSADOR TO): oy
PRESIDENT PEREZ WERE TYPED NOT HANOWAITTENs- AND ONLY SIGNED BY ;
£ BOSCH. IN AKY EVENT, AMBASSADOR STRONGLY DISTRUSTS WKTANGO-1_ IN _ ae
[ANYTHING INVOLVING CUSEN EXILES AND SUSPECTS THAT RICARDD MORALES IS. -
EMOTIONALLY, IF NOT MENTALLY, UNSTABLE AND A CUBAN AGENT(SO ,

-DO.WED. COS BIscUSsseD GENERAL SITUATION ITH aw@aSSADOR THIS ee

; oy

“MORNING. AS CF NOW, AMSASSADOR, DOES NOT WANT TO GIVE ANY
“INFORMEATION TO VENEZUELANS ON CUBAN EXILES EXCEPT ON ESTABLISHED oe a . '
TERRORISTS AND ADVANCE NOTICE OF IMPENDING TERRORIST ACTIONS, LEAST . :

OF ALL DOES KE WANT US TO -DEAL KEITH AKTANSQ*2 ON THIS SUSJECT, yo a
3. SINCE THERE APPEARS TOE SEVERAL SivES WITHIN GAMES BEING

i
i
i
‘
i

‘PLAYED, KEREs AND SOURCE OF REF 8 1S WXTANGS-2 CONE OF THE HAUOR i
= . oo, SECRET

Ye


--- Page 39 ---
TAR DAES ueSEw Or 76 o. ™~_ sora, CO" fs La .
. REPRODUCTION BY OHEMT
. . | “ gtcarert | issuime Ore ice 1 PAOD.
PEREON NE? NOt er. —

av i z

ADvaNcH Core asuae ssorten

ACTION UNIT

ACTION ©

=T 847813. EAz36 © PAGE 3-03 In 355264

TORS2g16522 JUL 77. CARA 33796

PARTICIPANTS.) RECOMMEND REF 3 NOT BE
: DISSEMINATED UATIL PICTURE 1S CLARIFIED.

i 4. Fie 75+420-28. &2, IMPDET.
wo a a ee os
i : 7 .
i Bee
ie
yt
.
i “y /
i
4



--- Page 40 ---
14-0000

BY Otmtn

PAGE @2

T @38993 ELA6521

TORS25 25242 JUL 77 . CARA 33784 ,
SECRET 2521512 ue 77° STAFF , ;

— CHE: CARACAS 33784 SC — oy
To: DIRECTOR INFO FR/NEW “YO RK 5 ; Ce
WNINTEL RYGAT wean

. REFS? A. DIRECTOR. £69199 «

a. caracas 34655 Gow Suse?)
; Le any AUDITIONAL INFO WE MAY oeTAIN ON NATURE OF. 7 . _
“MORALES CONTACT “WIth SLFAT*1 WILL GE CAaSLED TO apgagssees, ot Soe
AT THIS POINT ALL hE HAVE 4S INFO PROVIDED IN REF Be”

2.0 WHE It POSSIBLE. WE DON'T THINK THAT MERA ACEST vote Be

CONTACT WETh SUPAT@2 1S RESULT OF A WKTANGO=1 DIRECTED

or)

RECRUL THENT OP, ME ARE HORE INCLINED To BELIEVE THAT- THIS
“as SOME suaT GF. STRANGE” Ctaloson. OR- DOUBLE ~A5 ENT OPERATION,
PROBABLY ‘suasestes GY MORALES: ALMSELF. aSTENSTaLY TO MAKE
TIONED BEFORE,

ust Fd TO “SASCARLETS iw as ‘BEEN ME

“AND WE HAVE. Long - SUSPECTED, WITHOUT ANY HARD EVICENCE. THAT.

yO PALES. may SE A cas tO’ CUBAN AGENT» IT 1S GUITE POSSIBLE

THAT. HE: ins COANED Tre VENEZUELAN GOVERNMENT, oa WKTANGO $2 5

. ato eectevins THat ME was SOME SPECIAL ENTRE WIT SLFAT~ 1.

ALL IRAALU “BASED CN GUA PRESENT KNOWLEDGE CF THE
"oy S$ BCR ET


--- Page 41 ---
NPR he rasp esta ne pattie Suton de pete

aos ta

rare cone : mus er
ALOROOUCTION #Y OTHE

7 Came see cuss oe oe
| secaer?t FSDUING OF FICE 1B PASH

PEMD UN ROE.

apy an Does esa MOTD

IN 3545289
CARA 33784

H

PAGE @2-22

- TOR 2523242 JUL 77

INVOLVED AND ThE PRESSURES OF THE MGMENT WE THINK THAT
“MORALES AS mORE PRONE TO REACH AN ACCOMMODATION WITH SLFATo1 | :
“THAN WKTANGO*2 IS" UF GIVING A SECOND TRY TO THE RECRUITMENT - oo,
oF SuFat1. _ _ oo E

3. FILE? * 221-0007 60% 201 -0328945 1 201-2285923. :

E2. Iwppet.



--- Page 42 ---
6 -

REPSOL CTI Ce CTEM THAe
ASAYING OF HEE ED Pome BENE

IN 266922

ros

sras2e  - Page 2

ToR1z92c36z APR 77 caRa 32989

SECRET 2522252 APR 77 STAFF

CITE CARACAS 32949 .
TO DIRECTORS, Lael any
RYSAT WNIATEC ‘Seay
4, ON 26 APRIL 1977 WKDIET?S REPORTED THAT Rfeagpa
-

MORALES ALVARRETE (SUBJECT OF 201-2285923), aKa

NEL MONO", IS S.VORED TO HAVE KILLED IN MIAMI A CUaAK
PARSONS, WKBPETSS

EXILE ay THE Nave GF ROSERTO
SAYS THAT FARSTNS KORKED FOR BKHERALD AND UNDERTOOK

SEVERAL CLANDESTINE TRIPS TO CUSA, HE SAID AT TIMES PARSONS

RELPED GET PEGSLE CUT OF CUBA FOR A PRICE, PARSONS HAS

BEEN MISSENG SINCE DECEMBER 1676. THE EXACT REASON FOR

“WIS ALLEGED MUSZE® IS UNKNOWN,

‘PARSONS? ACCORDING po ;
wa!

of cor

pete °

2. FOLLORIAG “ARE TRACES ON ROBERTO
TO -UMhAYE*I322, 18 FEBRUARY 2968) AN AMCLEVE=25 7.
MEAYE CONTACT aa PROBASLY IDENT ICAL WITH ROBERTO ‘p ARSONS
RANI REZ, BORN 22 JULY 19:30 IN GUANTANAMO , PARSONS kaS. A
BKMERALD ASEAT FRIY 1965 THROUGH 1967 WHEN HE WAS TERMINATED

ON Zo NCVESRES RITHOUT PREGUDICE, HE WAS USED IN EXFILTRATION

AND INFILTRATION CFESATIONS AND OCCASIONALLY REPORTED GIATUITOU
€

Ss



--- Page 43 ---
seers — tore, Comes ae
see Mors Oreawae oon .
MEPROOUCTION BY OTHER Tras

secaes aa ASBUING OFFICE 18 PROMOTE
FUND OR Tere. =. =.

'

Peak 22-22 In 266922

TOR! 2920342 APR 77 . CARA 32949

an ThE OSE AND CGI.
3, INDEX PARSONS, FILE? 753-120-285 201-€2659235

E2. ImPDET,
Fi 7
i ; .
i. :
. a
: . cone a _
od :
!
i :
Poa
i tt *
— - = 7 ge taer i
i , i ; : ;
:

¥
eo
!
s



--- Page 44 ---
OUTGOING MESSAGE

. \G:
Sedan CEWTER UES OMY
ee o me vos ~- —_
ol
SECRET
wo eats ae me meno emt om cease maenanes memes
STAFFS” "0429337" DIRECTOR O2%bt
: more ISSeM BY: ALY

wo woes
ornvervo PER

cone: ine info: mu VL Sms roy Sho Arts

o aoe

om = 6t

TO: CARACAS INFO LAYMTAMI.¥
UNINTEL KMSTONE YO”
REFS? A. CARACAS 32949 LIN anneal
| Bs CARACAS 32954 LIN 2bau281 A (uot weeded Laf/maen)¥
3- PARA 2 BELOW TS THE ext OF ‘A MESSAGE WHICH WAS SENT TO THE

FBI ON 4 MAY. BASED ON REFS. PLEASE PASS THE INFORMATION TO. THE -
LEGATT CARACAS?  ¥

“ACCORDING TO A VENEZUELAN SOURCE WHOSE RELIABILITY HAS -

@. Ae
NOT BEEN ESTABLISHED + RICARDO -MORA L ES NAVARRETE 4 CUBAN-BORN -
NATURALIZED VENEZUELAN CITIZEN, IS RUMORED TO HAVE KILLED ROBERTO

PARSON So ‘ANOTHER CUBAN EXILE, IN MIAMI. FLORIDA. — SOURCE SAID

THAT PARSONS HAS BEEN MISSING SINCE DECEMBER 1976 AND THAT THE
REASON FOR HIS ALLEGED MURDER IS UNKNOWN. ¥

8. PARSONS rs PROBABLY IDENTIFIABLE WITH. ROBERTO

PA R SON 8 RAMIREZ “BORN, 10 JULY 1530 IN GUANTANAMO. ‘cUuBA. HE

YAS oF OPERATIONAL INTEREST 7) THIS AGENCY FROM JULY 3965 UNTIL 4,

coin NOVEMBER 296% ¥
C: A DIFFERENT SOURCE WHO IS USUALLY RELTABLEE

pares, : 0 . .
ORIG: a . ;
untt: . ;
Ext: * . a . : :
Bettie 7096GF Sy SSeS
. onaseen OFFCER es cans . me, Ze PI
= RECORD COPY £2. IMPDET
CL BY: ga7255

vsrerreeet


--- Page 45 ---
14-0000

OUTGOING MESSAGE

BiuaL CENTER USE OLY

SECRET
Pied wnat RAUNe erEnCA POR Dare.yacs Coe . wy ore 8 s0A08 REFERENCE DER
“TISTAFF °° _ . DIRECTOR
“ ” : O woes ——dOISSEM BY:
conr: NFO: Fit . O een
- : o29LG6 OD aereto PER

24 APRIL 4977 THAT MORALES HAS GONE INTO HIDING IN THE UNETED “staTES

TO AVOID A COURT APPEARANCE IN CONNECTION WITH THE INVESTIGATION or

THE DEATH OF FORMER CHILEAN OFFICIAL ORLANDO LE TEL IER. ¥
D. THE ABOVE INFORMATION IS BEING MADE AVAILABLE To THE

LEGAL ATTACHE IN. CARACAS. NO FURTHER DISSEMINATION IS BEING made. ¥ . ae

3. AMONG THE CLOSE ASSOCIATES PARSONS LISTED IN HIS PR@ PART I
COMPLETED IN JULY 14b5 IS ANTONIO BUSTILLO PEREZ {201-07SbLL5b}, A
" HENBER OF THE WKTANGO-2 GROUP. UASHINGTON 0269223 ¥
4. FILE: 202-02859235 X REF! 202-O774b874PARSONS}. E2 INPDET-d
COMMENT: REPORTED ABOVE INFORMATION AND STATION TRACES WHICH INDI-
CATED THAT PARSONS WAS OF PREVIOUS OPERATIONAL INTEREST To snuaye-

- ORIG: C/LA/PNC/VIANDREWSIS COORD? BREESEOREOAC/A/oPSesoonanEO,

LA/COGLLATRASH? 4 LA/CARTAMES}4 AUTH: PesLarPuccaesmnD33 REL: AC/LA

{LAUDER}-£

. oc

“oe wo

wow

bare: 4 NAY 27. DW Yenarors
onic: ROBERT ANDREUSSP é
wnt: ~C/LA/ZPNC/V iascos - fx. f a .

ee Ll A fe

kee ,
acta} coe tot. Steyayrac 3
meee Onan COpEmmAteS OSFCERS _* wee TI ey TOR, , COO
aeeueal 2 of ofl. & 2 lamboer

~ wee ~Cu BY: 707255



--- Page 46 ---
B 2u- 779697

Brana, CENTER USE OMY
ses ke Cd oy bad

onF O Q Qo Q Q

A cusseeamon

NEC RET :
WO904 08 Mavis cca tOR ‘Sere Tee eau cre ‘MEDEACE REPRwE NTE OED

CIA 32
O° ne 280228 sy:th{

. Qs730
conr: OLA B wro: me fetook Arsalip ees , C

Ay Weare b D mnere ren SOF
; Dene ¢ )22
TO: FSI//INTELLIGENCE DIVISION INFO DEPT OF STATE//SY/TAG,

IMMIGRATION AND. NATURALIZATION SERVICE//INTELLIGENCE DIVISION.¥
" SECRET--UARNING NOTICE ~ "SENSITIVE “INTELLIGENCE SOURCES AND
. METHODS INVOLVED=-NOT RELEASABLE TO FOREIGN NATIONALS=-NOT _
RELEASABLE- TO CONTRACTORS OR. CONTRACTOR/ CONSULTANTS~~DISSENINATION
AND EXTRACTION OF INFORMATION CONTROLLED BY ORIGINATOR ¥
CIR-31/01585-2? y
susvect: “RIcaRDo mo RA L£ S NAVARRETE ¥

On 2S APKILSIPD
L. weenesEnest 2 A VENEZUELAN SOURCE WHOSE RELIABILITY HAS

REPORTED THAT
NOT BEEN ESTABLISHED RICARDO - n ORALE s NAVARRETE, CUBAN"

BORN NATURALIZED VENEZUELAN. CITIZENS TS RUMORED: TO WAVE: RIECED—~ wr

ROBERTO PARSON Ss ANOTHER CUBAN EXILE. IN MIAMI FLORIDA.
SOURCE SAID THAT PARSONS HAS BEE MISSING SINCE DECEMBER 17 AND -
THAT THE ‘REASON FOR HIS ALLEGED “MURDER IS UNKNOUN. ¥ -

2.. PARSONS 1s PROBABLY. IDENTIFIABLE uITH ROBERTO P
RAMIREZ 4 BORN, 10 ‘JULY 3930 IN GUANTANATO CUBA. HE WAS. F

“anterest TO THIS AGENCY FROM JULY 1456S UNTIL NOVERGER 14 3 |
C2VELAN
3. 0A DIFFERENT, ‘SOURCE WHO 1S USUALLY RELTABLE REP ORG

ei | | a nsis

‘uns _ - : (1 AFSGR

E 2 | IMPOET |
cL sy: 007255

acveasing orecen cuosomatns ormceaa

chanswicance

SECRET



--- Page 47 ---
14-0000

OUTGOING MESSAGE

Pana Centea use Omir
e

aoe - roo Lead al on
- ONF 0 Q i] Q ft] o o 7 2 2
cusswrcanon .
SECRET
we ensae nenoua meccaton ra mas eacur ewe we snaue mararence uoen
CIA .
conr INFO: FILE on f O noes O1SSEM GY:
‘ : = 0 women
ee . lone. 0 3032 O cenero PER .:
O race 4. ‘

APRIL L977 THAT MORALES HAS GONE INTO HIDING IN THE UNITED STATES

70 AVOID A COURT APPEARANCE IN CONNECTION WITH THE INVESTIGATION — _

- oF THE DEATH OF FORMER CHILEAN OFFICIAL ORLANDO. LE TEL I ER. ¥ sod
Lee _ Me THE ABOVE INFORMATION IS BEING MABE AVAILABLE TO THE ; : . i

S. EXEMPT FROM GENERAL DECLASSIFICATION SCHEDULE OF E.0.

LUbS2 EXEMPTION CATEGORY $ B {2}. IMPOSSIBLE TO DETERMINE DATE OF

AUTOMATIC DECLASSIFICATION. XGDS-2-
BASED. ON? PARAGRAPHS ONE AND Tuo: CARACAS 32949 {IN-2bb922}

_ _ oo, UKDIET {UKDIET=5> &
: _° PARAGRAPH-THREE: ——SSCARACAS 32958 {IN-2baNG> =| WN
: Bas ud
a BL URMAYOR {UKSCARLET=99 _
OBJECTIVES J-3 ” - Zs
ORIG: LA/PNC cKENER x945u>s COORD: De/Larenc pesronnys C/LArcom\ =
LN
we

>
~EUARNER - “TELECOORD?’ AUTH: AC/LAD {LAUDER} § REL: c/PCS/LSH t a
; my

DCALAVENG

awe th te
te SHI 3 C/LAZAN {BEARDSLEY} + C/LA/OPS (DI. STEFANO}§ PCS/ITE AD
-%) C/LA/ COG

Ae
Thee eg.

PCS/ITC = {E+ UARNER - TELECOORDY: $ oO

+ COORomaTNO OFMCERE

LEGAL ATTACHE IN. CARACAS- NO FURTHER DISSEMINATION IS BEING MADE. ¥ : , wore

