
--- Page 1 ---
14-0000

104-10180-10138 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
ot . . <a — Sms = : = ne
Tae ROUTING ANDO § .CORD SHER)

. . COMMENTS
. fED/ S45 .
¢ 4200 Alain. Bldg.

| noon a fate lcreceasy
Parcents Vreaweests} INITRALS

” sefaso/ea

ep Peony

. : AUTMENTATING OFFICER

encvosune 5 FUE NUMSER I

aan feTrorg’

a ee eee
GATE NICRUFILMED ‘DOCUMENT oar Teocuse xr NUMBER

EXYs - 3523

Fon cane coanse


--- Page 2 ---
14-0000 . oy

ae ne ee .
. 2? Chict of Station, Mvane “

AQUATIC/Operat ional of
SV Supplies for ayia

GR RUA

RBH

: HAVA - 4989, 17 June 1960

1. The S¥ cupplics) ind instructions receded to establich tvo-vay SH
corresponicnce with AM[RE}1 cre tronsmitted herevith. Ve realize that some of
the instruction foreé aul supplies vhich are telag transuiticd are duplicates _
of those sent to the Station in support of other onerutions. fowever, in order
to facilitate the handling of cach operation, the gupplies for ench are
furnished as a complete unit. This vill preclude the need for berroving fron
one agent's oun fea to outfit another. 99

_ 2. ANIRE/will vrite to the Cuse O-ficer, using carson systen 739337.
Two upused sheets of carbon #39337 should be tteucd to the oyent for this !
Purpose. Ee should be told to store then separately to avoid accigental loss t
of his writing syste. lio carbon systen to developed by means of tablet
#30607. A supply of the developer materfal, in quantities sufficient for . !

ining purposes, eccorpenics this dispatch. af

. 3. ‘According to the Wi operctional ploa, SW messages written by ator). :
vill be mulled to accommodation addresses jn various Latin rican countries. .
Th accordance with that, KURIOT vill provide the eppropriate (Wil Field Staticw:) z
with the caterials necessary for developing the operatiozel messeces.

y
b, angra’ 2. wild aevetop the SW messages he recetves by means offpil 44

#58838.) Re Should be issued (twenty pills #58838 Yor that purpose. itis

recommended that the agent te told to hide his fcveloper Gir pute ine ong

Place, This should not present much of a problem vecnuse (the Pills ere 309
emall.\ We do not generally recommend tuat(pills be eanmcur aged a6 wedictnes.)4qF
Even th cases wkere the SW inureatent(does have a bona fide medicinal usage,

the concentration represented by the pil2 vould usually be jn excess of int
formal dosrge, d thus there would be a dencer of heving on unvitting person
use them by ac ident .qqir the Cuse Officer feels thet for Operational reasons

it is desirable camouflace thea us uedicines) the, should only be Kent ina
dottle which is clearly merked (02 EMM SUAL USL OULYS GQ .

5. According to tie operctionul plan, tie Tose to acent SX! messages vill
be prepared for the Arca Diviston by KURIO? et Neudquerters. The Area Bivie‘oc
‘will pouch the G/ saaces (23 “blenk"” sheets oF stat toner hp the sprrorriate
Field Station for Epplicatioa of the cover test and\oiling.

6. ihe egiha Case O"ftcer should fastlinrize himself vith the
accompanying ouppites and tustruct{ons before eny ettenpt is nade to trefa end
issue supplies to the azert. uxperience hes shova that {4 ts edvizable to plen
for two or three chort (2 nour) agent treinim: sesuicns scheduled over e period
of days, rather then to utterpt to crea the truinias into one ‘leag session.

. 7. Special sttention should be Given to planing the’ dver corresponleuce.
It ia usually recomseuded thet the agent use 3e nfice and return eddress)oa
his SW messazes to the Scetion, thereby flic-essociating hinselt orpletel.
froa his Si reports once, they ere in the Eoil chricel24thie requires that the
corremponience be ficticacl, and entails 2 certain anount of skill on the pert
of AMIRPlin fabric; tins apvareucly Guvent correspondeuce)?4tie have found
that the use of. ‘alse postal identity frequently provides the egent vith
considerable psycholosfes! recosurance during the course. of the operntion.

3. The cover/ ;
ss 3823

reed

| 2 oF 3

=



--- Page 3 ---
1400000.

° 38. The ‘eover correspondence must tn ce my apress to be differsnt from

the bulk of atl eniimirily Courd in the crnsel dcing used. It aheuld cortain
me tfortation which could be vieved cs s Piecious in eny way. The cxtern:]
Sspeets of the comvespondence must be tna: wt fa all aspects tr the Gi is to
de ertected to provide aay level of security.

9. Ye kave found that oh. MMAMLity of nny oy oysten dcpeats reaety

entirely on the eare vith which {t Is used. Please Stress the aved for enre-
fol writing techniques in your agent training sesstons.

V .
1c, JIhe folleving supplles ard tastructions are trensritted in support of
the ange: operation:

-) 99
a., Stantard Forn (fx 59 -CHT) whieh deseribes in detail hov to
writeGich & CyHbun shed

4
b. one Karbon bot +2010 laveted (bss0xsTRiTION carnai)is to be
used to denokStrate the principles Gorbon)\riting. The deVveLopnent, -
Frocess Sor this system can be carried out in the egent's presence.

e. Cue foottie (100 m4 developer £20509)htch vill develop
the demonstrat ti ferdod writing. ,

afa. tmstruction ra/8-16029)ahortbing the development of the
(teonsmarion cannon 44

; ul

e. (Three carbon sheets £39337) The one labeled Practice caRpon)
is to be\used tn training and is be retained by the Station. (103 )99
ore to be issued to the agent. The agent should not be allowed to

[sec the development of this system, nor should he be shovn *he"q9

a
t

Ressage after development.

q
f. Instruction Form 1-36032) specifte instructions for the
devclopment(or carbon system £39337)

} & Cty Pills £30607, to be used to develop practice and real
messages written @th carbon 139337949

i he Two practice mescages uritten with PyS ingoing SW system
which he should use to practice his development technique.

9
i. @venty-rive pills £58838 wintch ate Swill usell develop the
SW Dessaces hq-recetvea. Two or’ three (or these pills) should be used
in training. Uveaty of the remaining 7 » phould bé igsued to the

~ agent. a4
Fi J Tastruction Form £2-25058) instructions for the us¢ of H
(eveloper £56838.) ~ |

k. Qne copy of the “Station Maintenance of su Supplies fora.

| i
2. Miscellaneous ttems such as (ottan, ewab sticks, and viotteres) :
items generally useful for Sx processing. . !

i

i
U1. You vill note thet two different xinds ot(carvon sheets)haye been
subzitted with the Supplies. Ore is labeled (BEXONS TRATION caREOME This should
be used in the practice session or %- Tt should be used to demonstrate (carvan A
writing technique: the agent. This system be developed in the eapeat's
prescgse. The arbona submitted (139337)Jconstitute the agent's operatt.
Sending syst gee Sheet of carbon #39337\hns teca lubelea(PRrsr tor cnson. JG
Avter the agent has mastered the use of iReTion CaRBotfyhe chould be
Given co oFportunity to write vith the (Pract: ICE CARSO it 1s very importent
that the Case Officer have the chenee to critique the ne's SY writing .
technique with the actual system vhich the agent will use. Hovever, the agent

i . should not/

a

TR ee tae at ot eanceet meee tenet oe oes cece ee

4p


--- Page 4 ---
shoud not be alloved [to witnens the development J hts operetio::
system fror ve chown the (ve esaige after develope nt) The (develope: i
739337\ehould be carried out at the Station Hy the Case Officer

train messages written with the operational ERACHICR CARBON a
‘the agent's techulque fe poor, he should, *(photosraptio)or theld
messiyes to point out to the aycat those“arcas where ane.
or he should just discuss it verbally. .

12. The Station should retain the momerrodt CARBON) the C if

CARBON,\and the rest of the oupplies. Please becr in mind ti
mescuges and voratng taterials should be treated as classified.

13. -Plense do not hesi*ate to request edditicnnal help fron! 9 .F ao

needed.
t 2) .
Wy _
, Airman Ma. Vrewto .

. . Aa JOANTA FR. MAMESTI. .
Enclosures: (1 Box &1 Env). /

1. Supplies & Instructions .

2. Supplies : ,
22 June 1960 ,
Dist:ibution:

3 + CO3, Havana, v/encls o/s

ach, w/o encle

3 - TSD /SRS, w/o encls
- wa/h/et, ufo encis
? - TSD/SAB, w/o encls

rs0/san{smaneatrick)( 2922) tgke
°3

Sassen
BECRET

rest S3c BE iiterosss
rear Sreerzea acy 189
Ween 028 O8SLTR


