
--- Page 1 ---
| 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |
REVEERBED AE CDA HEADQUARTERS BY

(104-10226-10117|
MATERLAL

more ape

HOUSE SELECT COMMUTPED ON ASSASS OVATIONS SCARE

PELE-TLTLE/NUBER/VOLUME 2st -{ Coe

INCLUSIVE DATES:
CUSTODIAL UNIT/LOCATUON:

DELETIONS, IF ANY:

DATE jATE
RECEIVED RETURNED

NO DOCUMENTS MAY BE COPIED OR RENOVED FROM THIS FILE

i
i

3
4
4
4
!
i
}


--- Page 2 ---


--- Page 3 ---
14-0000

~~ C] unctassirie. oy area C) CONFIDENTIAL CJ. secret
SVIR eG

"90 July 1964

COMMENTS (Humber ooh comment to show tam hum
» whom, Drow 9 line ovrons ¢olumn after each Comment)

DO/sR
2 DO/say-—
S2/cl/eBri ght

~ 6 .
/ofi %- The Anforcation was sent to
"Cl stare recently snd has

orohably keen f-rwardad to 071

for renly, Thourh vou mint

he able to u3e this extrs nODy.

Wes!

PLS os

% aadiea A VAsAaeD ;, “|
Sennen Oe eeneck Bip
ORR Sule —

Sov . Ofer aa . ra gue oc]
Vietbe Nps ares, ‘no LB:

Blas .

the den BO73
re OE

= INTERNA C)_UNctAssiFiED
0 tse att 7


--- Page 4 ---
14-0000

HTT) SEITE

\
4

Chief, Cl Uteft/L 4
2c 42 Nos \

Chief, Contact Division, 00

Atteugted AIS Penetration of Mell Yelesboas Laboratoriss ~ ul-10612

1

we would ap-

preciate bsiag eGrized the date this information ic furwanted

to the Berean,

. your
prior So Bie trip to tho WEL ws

 infermmtion, pemtasten to brief Dr. Schrooder

by cur Rew York

r reyasated
Office Sut rofeesd by FI Staff. In view of Ais explagmunt, bar
ever, oA puevicua CD/00 contacts with bim, FI recamsnisd ba
be provided with a oteung Gefensive end wealitica briefing.

- So Pavteer Lngut may te directed to Mrs. Shirley Steteon,
0/00, Saypaxt Brann, Poors

ALTA Reem moe om Ts

d 6S C27

eth ok ty
tne A re oy

a

Zo SuLY 63

°

ar

423, 1717 # Street, N. ., extension

BM. ASECRAPS

joo-S7

SECRET sevemue dL. AALS 9


--- Page 5 ---
14-0000

seme: 0 SECReT

‘UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT

-Memorandum

To : Chief, Contact Division pata: 1 July 1963

Attn =: Me Connell /Czajkowski/Lincoln Start

from : Chief, New York Office

supjrcr: Attempted R.I.8. Penetration of Bell Telephone Labs

Ref: MY Reporte 2968-3 and 2969-3

1. We thought the attached reports would be of interest to Lincoln’
Staff from a Soviet realities standpoint. We also felt that they should
be brought to the attention of Division management because the M.0. out-
lined therein is becoming 4 mijor factor in dealing with sources who have .
contact with Sovbloc nationals. It hag been our experience that the type
of activity outlined haz been on a mrked increase, particularly since
the establishment of the KOB 10th Directorate. Although such activity
by Sov legals is taking plece throughout the continental U.3., undoubtedly
ite greatest inpact is being felt in the New York and Washington, D.C.
“areas because of the larg: Soviet Government establishaents in both of
these cities. For this reason it would seem imperative that both WAFO
and NYFO be extremely vigilant for auch activity in companies and insti-
tutions with which they are dealing in order that it my be recognized
in its earliest stages and appropriate CI/CE countermeasures instituted.
In order to assist other offices in this respect, ve plan to vrite in the
near future an article for the Division Newsletter, outlining some of our
experiences along these lines.

2. We were somevhat disappointed in CI Staff's reaction to our
recent request for assistance in defensive briefing of the subject of

one of the attached reports. It seems to be quite clear now that our
original assumption concerning his being R.I.8. targeted was quite correct
and that there to a strong likelihood that his current trip behind the
Curtain will be utilized by the opposition for provocation and/or an
actual recruitment attempt. We wonder in future cases of this nature
exactly what support we may expect from Angleton's shop. Although we

“feel that we have a fair capability for handling such matters here in

Bew York, we do admit that, at least on this one, we would have felt
Slightly more comfortable had a CI specialist been along, if for no other
reason than to preclude any possible Monday morning quarterbacking by the

VATE

— SECRET. lark

Martensitastion,


--- Page 6 ---
14-0000

a

yee

rr:
poles
:

<2-

Subject: Attempted R.I.S. Penetration of Bell Telephone Laba

3. Judging dy the attached mterial, it would appear that, despite
established Bell ‘policy (see our 16 May memorandum re Case 39,790), the
opposition has seen fit to deflower at least tvo of Bell's scientific
virgins. We serfously wonder at this point just how many other Bell
people. might be in the same boat. Perhaps, as a result of ali this,
some representation by Bell management to the KOB will be forthcoming,
spelling out..to that organization, as was spelled out to our ow, estabd=
lished company policy pertaining to such mtters. In any event, it would
appear that at least one or two Bell scientists, and there are probably
more, have been giving the 8.1.8, more cooperation and reporting than the
Agency. Let's hope that in tke near future Bell management takes some °
effective steps to rectify this rather ludicrous, and patently: dangerous, °
situation. so

Ji q: Geese
AY B. L. REEVES
Attecheents: SY Reports 2968-3

Giagle/ng ; ; .

SECRET


--- Page 7 ---
14-0000

ee neneertenreemtentimnanin ng) nag atntrttret taal ee eat

eee reser

cept peers ng re ee at pen ae

Py oat rem ae
wt

UNEDE EY SENT re os |

AMemorandian

Yo : Chisi, Contace Divicion vate. 26 Jue i
Attn ; Support (chirley Stetecn) anne we
BRON Culef, New fork Gsr'ice woo
seuper: Qppareat kl Interest in tantred BFF “(201-73 4194)
11 Telephone las:> ;

vie

}e 1M 0930-1230 hours J Juuc, Manfred 4. Senrueder ci Bell Laps
received a strong defensive briefing in conpection with his June-
July trip to the YSSk und Sulguria (eee mp 7 May Coorlinatlon Out-
line for subject)* During Schrveder's briefing, Nagle ellelted
from him that prior to a trip to tae USSR in 1959 he bad been en-
tacted by an individual. who represented hinsel? as u West German
Intelligence Officer. More importunt, we eise learned that, ut
about the same tiue, RIS cultivation o/ Schroeder apparently began.

f. 2. Concerning the West German approach, Gchroeter indleated
that his mother, who resides in Hambury, wa. ve ened in 199s by

an individual who cleized to be an old acain.invance of her son's

and who was interested in contacting hia concerning employment in

the US. The caller left a phone uwnse~ and rafi that he would ap-
préciate il if Senroeder couid call hin nexe tin: he was iu Haaburg.
Schroeder's mother relayed the message wo ite con, and, os requested,
he telephoned the caller just nrivr to his ivf, USUR junzct. The
individuai he called identiried himselt an « West Geruwin intelligence
Officer and said that be would likn to mes. ochrocder as coon ag

asible. Schroeder agreed. When thoy mcb, tac individunl in question

Schroeder does not recali his name) pr “ed suitable eredunttale
and expressed interest in Senrocder's urly t ta: GSR. According ta
Schroeder's account, tke West Geraan Invelligence Officer gave him the
old “keep your cyes and vars open” pitch, and 4:14 him that he would
contact him in the ‘iret West German city wiiek he touched down
after his USSR trip. Schroeder was convacted in Stuttgart promptly
after returning to Germany from the un his way puck to the US.
Because of his US employment anc the fact that Zell paid tor his trip,
Schroeder became very “pprehensive about any further contact with the
West Germun service and et the time of the call indicated tact he nad
nothing to say and wanted no rurther contact. Other tuen the cursory
examination of tredentials (us reported above), ichroucder de no
attempt to establish the Lona fides of the Gein who ma vke approach.
We pointed out to Schrveder the unlikely possitility that the appreach
might not have deen vone fide and might, In fuct, uave been a provo-
cation.

% ye) ae tenet.



--- Page 8 ---
14-0000

Appacet. slo detcress (a Mani re. la al eat,

BOL Red aah. not .

2. Apparently a.2.5. tivation oF sp
rrier to the ateve incident. According ta his esc vat. ae how:
ceived what appeared te ve a routine tavitacioa te wtset t

MAD ate

acoustics “sill 3 in Moseo o Leniwijrad in wy
connectioa witi, the invitesion, ue wrote. te un. Sov. :
tiut during his visit he would Line to mert vo : Toe
Sov acoustics engineer Wig wan very Cnturcstes i. ee Po :
and nnd dune sever. Russvan transi Wloug of waa te wae H
@ result of this corres se, Starcedes 2 t . ' .
ut his hoa a ¢c sor te aie 4

. 4 epriful inwit.: :
of the ctat: Commit tee Nos Qo Pahtdoun & Co
caller, Wiose TAG Se .

tion t

Like te del.
Sehrsccer indisa.. :

which he had t. - :
Lastrue were . :
finely agreed te y
ay the tuvits* ica. : ;
nroeder tay . rs
the latter decil «as in
an area closed say event, | _
Chathaa, New Jersey, gad 2b that tone tue we ‘
Yor her husband. * + >
4. Schromter satd that hh 26 te SBR was qaite .
routine and that Ae cad? recall nothing sub Cotas voabary hope ings :
during the trip. uring 4, nS gov coatespart, ©
speaks fluent Geraan, ueted Ris se Ttigot :

continually. ys te
5. Comet ius

éne evening from
sentative of Amt
Purduev had just coxph eted & vasit to
i eity had assed hin to deliver a pr:
i the pnone call. Volgia insisted on deliveric
in person, and th: two @de arrangements te !

following week in Manhatten. ‘This began o oeu:tes of ay .sproxizate Ly siz



--- Page 9 ---
14-0000

ee

pleture lable wife's Sul gi:

‘ and his wife wrote severe: letters to the Bulgarian fo.

a

ENCH IVE

Subset: Apparent sa. antercvet In hunt
well Delephone Luau.

de Sey eden,

vr wore soucucts with Tt: i te ed aL,
received « nate fr. utaticg’ teat ne
ing to the USS Lorde: that ale wive could -
there. Incidentally, Uchrosder's suly other
in lyse waen he met aim tn Cope hagen wt a prot

6. Schroe@ r said that wet, tf not al, of felg.nte Dhou:
to hia were to hic fiwe and usually sppenroa to have be the wade
pay phones. Schruzder sed that wie aret lege ‘
lunches and dinners in Munhattan, wwolnibitug at al
Meeting, thoutes, ts.) ontertatmaent 2. each other ln fb
homes. Schroeder ciatas that hia wife aceoajanted ht
his contact with Yulyin. Other thm to nig own faaily, Vo lh neve
introduced Schrobder to any other (u.tviduals.

7. Schroeder sluime that on
unclassiite) t technical payer, °
engineer. Schroed:r can't r: uether Tolgin spectfhenlly
the information or whether he turord it over te tin on bie ow

At one point during their relationuhlp, Volgan enkea Schr Oh to ve lte
an article on US acoustics work for publ te ution Lic a aoviel teRVALea

der declined.

Journal Se

hid been quite untve
wae consern that oct!
nf ybinst devel p-
atives. His view ”
wis AS A resule ul

3. In retrospect Schroeder admitted that hr
about his relationsaip with Volgin and exprensed s
security hadn't been more active tn adaouisning bh
ment of relationships with Sov Govercient sep
of his experiences 304 ctompietely cotneidec wl
our discussion.

9. Another fuctor Wale vbvieusly enters ‘ato
no eatcaction. dthrved:
neither he nox, tc the best of his’ Knowlndge, hic wie nave ever deen
approached by Sovblot ‘reprenentatives in tii. coutyy cone
wife's faatly i. Pugaria. Iie wiv 's mother, iwannite ,
dumigrated to the US tn April li and Lived with Scnroeder sud his
wife until November 1)62 when she returaed to Soria, apparently because
she was homesick andl couldn't miguct to the new language and life in
the US. Schroeder Raid that his mot: dicJas's origtanl exit vis
request was rejected ta 1953 by tue Qtrias Governaut, tut after he
ign Minaotry
um to jeave in 160. x

she was finally granted permis:

' SECREI

genre «= ZO 6 Ce.

initiative,



--- Page 10 ---
14-0000

SECRET

SENSITIVE

| 4-

Bubject: Apparent RIS Interest in Manfred R. Schroeder,
- Bell Telephone Labs

-. Plans to fly to Sofia to spend approximately a week with his wife's
“family there. Schroeder had not mentioned the Bulgarian visit in
outlining his original itinerary to Bob Martin of this office, there-
fore, it was not mentioned in Schroeder's Coordination Outline.

i
i coe \ :
i 10. After Schroeder visite the USSR on his current trip, he

11. All of the above would seém to indicate quite strongly that

" Sahroeder, ag we originally surmised, hao been targeted by R.I.3. In-

briefing Schroeder, we ran through soma of the typical entrapment

situations fabricated by the opposition, e.g., women, homosexuals,

5 purdbase of drugs for Sov citizens, black mrket activity, acceptance
of letters to mail outside the USSR, commitments to disaffected Sovs,
etc. In addition, we stringently admontohed Schroeder against any
notetaking or photography which could in any way be construed as com-

. promising. We also alerted Schroeder to the fact that some attempt

‘ might be made to use his .ife's family aa leverage in a recruitment

attempt. In this connection, we pointed out to Schroeder that there
was @ strong likelihood that the R.I.S. and/or Bulgarian service would
make an approach to him during his forthcoming visit to Sofia. An
approach in Bulgaria would give the Sove an opportunity for disavowal

. and also would provide the proper setting for maximum utilization of

’ relatives. When Schroeder mentioned that his sister-in-law, FNU
Mensckik, bad indicated several times in the past that she would like
to leave Bulgaria, we etrongly admonished him against making any com-
mitments to her, pointing out that she may possibly be co-opted by
the opposition. We told Schroeder that any representations to gain
an-exit viea for his sister-in-law should be channeled through the
US Legation in Sofia. Schroeder was told that, if any pressure were
applied concerning his vife's family, his best reaction would probably
be a noncommittal, "I'll think it over when I get home?" All in ali,
we alerted Schroeder as best we could to the opposition M.0. and pre-
pared him on how best to avoid some of the not so obvious pitfalls
which might be in store for hin.

12. Prior to our briefing of Schroeder, Bob Martin alerted Bell
management to all of the remifications of Schroeder's travel behind
the Curtain. The management was informed by Martin that we felt it
our obligation to point out to them the strong possibility that Schroeder
had been targeted in order that they would have all of the facts avail-

able before signing off on his trip.

“SECRET:
crncirup 72 722


--- Page 11 ---
14-0000

7 Co a SECRET
| SEiiSITIVE
50

Bubject: Apparent RIS Interest in Manfred R. Schroeder,
oo Bell Telephone Labs

; - 13., Asseaament of Schrueder: Subject, a very accomplished
i: - sctentist, heads up all acoustics research at Bell. He reads . . oN or
‘Russian and is fluent in Cermen, French, Spanish, Italian, Dutch, :
and English. He impresses us as being a rather savvy, discreet, an

: cooperative, mature, stable, well motivated individual. We attri-

po bute Schroeder's apparent lack of discretion in his dealings with

: the Bove more to the subtlety of the Sov approach than to his ow

: paivete. It has deen our experience that most US businessmen and

i mo scientiete are very susceptible and vulnerable to the opposition

. "approach mainly due to somewhat of a lack of realistic public . +
education. concerning contacts with Sovbloc nationals. We feel .
that Bchroeder's degree of cooperativeneas with US services has

been enbanced conaiderably by his feeling that he has really been

taken for a ride by the opposition.

Incidentally, when we asked subject for permission to release this
information with source disclosure to the FBI, he was at firet some-
what apprehensive and expressed the desire to talk it over with one
. of big Bell superiors before he made eny commitments. He finally
. agreed, hovever, when we convinced him that it would certainly be in
‘ his best interest to get on record vith the FBI as soon as possible.
: * Most of his apprehension about the FBI seemed to be attributable to
the fact that he has just been granted UB citizenship and, in addition,
is now somevhat concerned that hie activities with the Sova in some
way mny effect his security status vhich in turn could be very detri-
sental to his career.

i Based on our limited contact with Schroeder, we have every reason to
H believe that he would be suitable for operational use, should the
; Bareau choose to pursue such a course.

: 14. We would strongly recommend that all of the above be passed

. to the Bureau ASAP in order that that organization my effect contact
with Schroeder and provide him with proper guidance concerning any
further approaches by Sov or Bloc nationale in this country.

JAY Ii ree

ee) ee

GHagle/ug


--- Page 12 ---
14-0000

De OY te. nt, Berean bee

aM! ae OY ‘Lyd. ARIA... Germauty. C ner
vailp © Weas vemma. WY -itizensiiy pew...
agp). ation for ecu -mde 22 Jaguar 1764.

3. dome Adarogs: 15. Cates «vou:
QL..atte. Jew vevoay

; “oe
ss 1)g08 MaRS of ed oe
Qwolmueyi dtar '
“ths Maboratert as
nummy Nill, Hew varaey

Brad uv? Aowetles hrosarch
5. Bhypeier): . Qubjest vill tenrativaly Avyart US 15 May, ares ing
- Wogeow 19 May. lo wi) spend trd voate viaiting lave
1+ th teow ood bonugrad a4 tes Lavitetion of D. Ovieutast,
Deputy Gmirran, State wusaittee fur Coordination uf
. Scsestifiea Research. i Use ly ay arrival dato fe ot
eceeytable to the Kovlets, oubjost vill mame the trip is
Jun or Julye

“6. ‘

Of @ CAs echedule at tho tins subject dcaline! ihe .
toviteties. Ia early Mareh of this pear he recaived tbe :
Invitation fron Oristient martiored above.

'Durlig, aie trip, guojectt will dissusa with Soviet enanor-
parts verious aspects of vuies oommuniusticng recesrvh,
@leetruesoustios, aud arauitectural ascustics. He wiii
alew visit Soviet leboruteries imvalved in research 1
there flolds,

te f 1 Bubject wae granted Secret cleavenne ty Ridd ston

: ; atertel Oummad $0 duly 1736 in antictpation of his
: being used on elaeeified project at Boll Laboraturies.
Alisa seme ereck cn subjoot ponding.


--- Page 13 ---
14-0000

A “eee ~
' -
'
“. .
- . 2-
Dut sonsviwt apprehensive, Se wis again sontasted in
IW! for Aeristing euveoqueck to 8 U8 visit of a doviet
counterpart.
-% Pojats ae + Bubseot's wife ws
r OF Lia, bow reported y bolde W
: an ) eitise.sbip. tL. Yoreder J9h2 wDJoct eanaypd to
_ arrange for Lan. pation wo tae Us uf bie acther-Ls-lav,
a ivual‘ia wrecks, ‘Aftar a short etry io this oontry, -
$ . however, ofr vetuicod to her buss {:. Sofla in Marah 1463.
. _ Ta additim to hls evther-la-lev, proosedly thers are
, . Ahor relatives of bis vit etill living in Buigaria.
'

nino cera

16. Fynting af Dries Sebject’s trip will be funded ty blo eaxreany.
: 1S toy 1965.

- y “Se
: & .
by meet .

a
Ey a


--- Page 14 ---
14-00000

a . “y. pranes Hm mw o oot SECRET T- oe
ia UNITED) STATES GOVERNMENI SENSITIVE

Memorandum
wo + Chief, Contact Division _ DATR: 26 June 1963
Attn : Support (Shirley Stetson) 00-A- 2366 14 2
yuom ; Chief, New York Office (NY. 208 G4

are se Sorent RIS Interest in Bonala Ez. Tones,

Bell Laboratories wtp te see —
. ok roth ae
inst . .

° tril Tabonaroares: “ ie
i ue oa
1. During routine debriefing of Donald 5. Thomas of Bell Labora- |
tories in connection with his recent USER visit to attend the Popov .
Soctety Meeting, 5-14 May, Moscow (see NYOR 8878 for Coordination Out-
line)+ subject mentioned having had recent contact with a Soviet Govern-
tment representative in this country. The Soviet in question tdentified
Uhimself to Thomas as Gleb Aleka? Pavlov and gave his address as 1216

. First Avenues, Manhat: yy

2. Accbrding to Thosme, his initial contact with Pavlov took

Place in late March following the International Convention and Show
“of the I.B.E.5., 25-29 March, New York City (see Case 39343). At the

: couvention Thomas became friendly with two Soviet counterparts in

; attendance, A. V. Tiel and Anatole Trutka, both of whom Thomas invited
to his home for a social visit during their US stay. When the Sova
departed fo¥ "home following the convention, Thomas saw them off at New
York International Airport. It was at the airport that he first met
Pavlov, who apparently was seeing off all of the Sov I.E.E.E. delegates.
After the Sov delegation had departed, Thowns and Pavlov returned to
Vanhattan together and, on parting, exchanged addresses. ‘

3. A couple of weeks after their initial meeting, Pavlov tele-
phoned Thanas at his home and :told him that Tiel and Trutka had asked
him to send their warmest regards to Thame and thank him for the
hospitality which he showed them during their trip to this country.
During the conversation, Pavlov expressed an interest in renewing his
acquaintance with Thomas, and suggested that he would enjoy visiting
him at his home in Madison, New Jersey. Thomas said that he would
enjoy seeing Pavlov, but that he was currently preparing to leave on
a trip to the USSR and Europe and was not scheduled to return to the
US until late May. Thomas suggested that, in view of this, perhaps
early June would be a good time for them to plan on getting together.
Pavlov replied that he, himself would be in the USSR then, but would
contact Thomas when he returned in early suly- Incidentally, Pavlov‘'s

a coy a tae hed

SECRET

SENSITIVE /06 Ade



--- Page 15 ---
14-0000

tg,
Adel

SECRET .
SENSITIve

2

Subject: Apparent RIS Interest in Donald.E. Thomas,
Bell Laboratories

Phone call to Thomas vas made on a pay phone. In fact, when the opera-

‘tor cut’ 4a for overtime, Thomas called Pavlov back at the pay phone.

Thomas mentioned that he Possibly might have the phone number written

“down. somevhere. .

4 after the phone call from Pavlov, Thomas called John
McVicker $f the State Department and inquired if any clearance of
Pavlov's proposed trip to hie home in Madison would be necessary.
MeVicker told Thowas that any such clearances were Pavlov's worry
and that he need not be concerned about. same.

5. During his recent trip to the USSR, it would appear that
Thomas was exposed to two incidents which possibly could have been
of opposition fabrication. One involved an approach by a Soviet
interpreter by the name of FRU Petrov, who took Thoms aside and
asked him if he could do him a personal favor by getting him a sub-
scription to National Geographic Magazine for which he, Petrov, would
reimburse Tkomas in rubles. Thomas politely refused. (Po fe sesmny £3%
“A enF est vesh
6.° The other incident jnvolved Thomas prt Se Jotographed with:
attractive young fe inte: shkina. According
to Thomas, when one of the Soviete in their party var was about to take
4@ picture of him standing next to Ludmilla, another individual stand-
ing nearby vas pushed out of the way apparently so that he would not
be included in the photograps. In addition, Ludmilla attempted to .
strike an affectionate pose with Thomas for the photograph by slipping
her arm through bis. Thomas claims to have pushed her arm away Just
as the photo was being snapped.

7. Assesament of Thome: Subject strikes us as being extremely
naive and unrealistic. He appears to be more apprehensive about his
dealings with CIA than his dealings with Sovieta. In fact, when Thomas
was asked if he would mind if a tape recorder vere used for debriefing,
he became very nervous and expressed a fear that, if such a tape vere

‘mada, perhaps the Soviets might gain access to it and use it aminet

him in some way at a future date.

Thomas had an outline in his own handwriting of the sessions of the |
Popov Society Meeting. When we asked for a photostat of same, he ,
again expressed misgivings and indicated that he would prefer to have
a typewritten copy prepared for us instead of a copy in his ow hand-
writing because ke was fearful that it might fall into Soviet hands. .

\ RET {
 Sigitte 70 O72


--- Page 16 ---
14-0000

ae SENSITIVE

Subject: Apparent RIS Interest in Donald E. Thomas,
Bell Laboratories

had _. We inquired of Thomas why he had not mentioned Pavlov to us during our
_ @efensive briefing of him before his trip. He replied rather nebulously
‘ : that it was his understanding that it was company policy that our only
: . function in seeing him before ts trip was to give him a defensive brief-
: ing, and that, since no debriefing was involved at the time, he felt no
i “~ ‘oblggation to volunteer the information concerning Pavlov.

‘ ~ It 1s our opinion that Thomas's obvious naivite, apparent lack of sophisti-
: cation, and- extreme apprehension concerning dealings with our Agency would
Hf wake him most unsuitable from the standpoint of operational utilization

: by the Bureau. —
i

pou . 8. We would strongly reccamend that all of the above be passed to
: . the Bureau ASAP in order that that organization may effect contact with
i . Thomas in time to provide him with proper guidance concerning any further
approaches by Pavlov or other Sov legals in US. +

G+ Crm

‘ B. L. REEVES a 4

Glagle/ng

poo _ SECRET

So Sense CO SLR



--- Page 17 ---
14-0000

+ Dutonere
. einerery Stajest departs BI 3 may for Mocsow to attend
marting, S34 May. Pellowlng Hocoow nesting

Bogov
be will vielt lade 4a Gostara Barepe for aggrcaimately ene

Intalligees Activities: AMjest us contests’ by
Gale 1958-99 eoasarmtng info ca Crvict work tn hie Held
-- Wade be 8 cequire’ from centects with Govist satansific

2 Aatersaticxal ssoting fn WJ.

“ap ralbte to Stn” male tro wate
ge few rage Sebsoctio trip will be Pentod by hie ccapeny.
. , Brdeving effics and partietyenses Briefixg will bo ceminsted by

SECRET 10602


--- Page 18 ---
14-0000

CENTRAL INTELLUGUN E AGENCY

0 THe masertat contine migrate alte ny the Nimn! Delon o
+ MB, URC Bere OY amet 20d He nantes on oF rereniion of whch

. eee te eee
COUNTRY USER REPORT 80, oo. fy a ae
WBRCT Alleged Bouse Arrest of Soviet . valeoste Sof ue ye OS :

Bolontist, L Chistovich fot
. } NO PAGES 2 .
. PEFERENCES : : "
( a Sore ‘ @ oe
So be tae > Py
. oj F 74
a en a ‘t
- THIS 1S. UNEVALUATED ine INFORMATION © _. 2 i
poe. US citizen, professor ina 6 University. — rs ee mae e bias
' “a. rn
-© Be ie an authority on acoustics. : Ee a ko a
. Clea re lek Ruse
oe °

.} 1. I attended the TRird International Congreas on Aroustico, 1-8 Bapt oy,
Stuttgart, West Cernany.

2. While at this Congress I met a Soviet female acientiut, L Chietovich,
who is eonnectad with the Mavlov Inatitute of Physiology, Leningrad. -
One day during the Congress I took a walk in the Hlack Forest with
L Calatovich and another Soviet scientist. After a short tine, the
other Soviet acientist excuse! himself saying that he had t> rejoin

hie colleagues.

3. In Jume 1963 Manfred Schroeder, an acoustician with bell Telephone
Laboratories, vee in the USSR. On hin return tu the US he told me that
ho bad heard while in the USSH that. L Chistovich, on her return from 7
the 1959 Stuttgart Congress, hal been placed unter huuse arrest. He - BS ‘
also said that he had seen L Chistovich while he wan in the J5uR, and ‘
he had asked her’whether tt was true that she hai been placed unier
house arrest on returning from the Stuttyart “ongress. ie raid

Chistovich's only reply was to blush,

4, I suspect that the individuat whe reporiet L Chistevich to the
was Yurly Pavlovich Tysanov.. te in connected with tae Ae
i, in Moscow. He publishes very little ami his conmiuet har
. me. He was in the United States th “U-VRO7. Losurpect that the
that L Chietovich took a walk with ne alone may wel. have been the reason
. she was Placed pader houre arrest. -
peg RETEE ‘ . ; Poy &

Se Fe ) ros

Ae I Oy esau me cn

~— oom

font

;
{

! AD e x

 diwemterten © decoment is Bmted to civitca employees cad extive duty wlitiary peresnse! whit tie iteliees-@ composes!
re Slate; Sqtathee who mast oct epee tbe biicrectioe Hower. wate specirauy eaaelind

13 of ibe riseats ead cyomcier of ihe US Govevsmons avecuy

dussmsasted to orgasioy

Ee OL Bt DiESEM NATED TC Scarencr TORE Ne rales “ae tee nononnmmn



--- Page 19 ---
fpf ate wrod dited Qe &7. fe, fe wah. && ne)

. PD drame ofr Jee bn: (yb ME needs € Lone tte
PB) xen het! a Eat: oe Cttnah Be oy
. : Te, : Cheeden

hae ~ ous Sas ter Ler. “ pe
Peri BLEED Ll, aia “7
FE) sept bled 3) bof b 2 bhi yu) :

/ ‘ i? 4)

—F8/ Me WIA Li Zl « QS gf ene 63 [beret LOL
Qe Duct Spe C8  detod. blithe’ on Os.

TB) &é Lill 2b Ff. £2 Yih, 0) pi Jie aston _
Ao Sy Soviet. Bre. 3 fi Lf (6) a
79) Ke LiL 21 Dek G3 Manele if ca
R: SpnieP6 bre. Laon S GLE ( fo LYS)
prod blel Step £3 fe hoe hd (oles b3438.
76 “lg. Src bre Saih Valdypenee oF! Les tna US, aie

— 8) & fpf dated wy Mag 63 (ab If bad) és sone

bleed 3A, “feb, LiuaLiee toe
6) 0 Ei es wy) bd! 4 ols ibe oe (indag AE gece,

een bn USS.

pl Ge 4, £3 (7: tah Splint: a

ae) be. DAL; Mifees tr YS &
. / cot deed [24 Gi a (os 4.0) felis 69499),

FB) Fak wy vy fala <fe,
7 fee: Z Oe Coe ee Fun)” Be beve ae -
LPP a €- . (79); é¢- a Dl ty _

PY kyoot dated 22214 ose Lip L @( 65-3998 :

Ke. Sere flere Ay lee tr “S> :

Fb) eprid bled ara Cry yy) -
cL LT poy pay Ay 7)

Tor SECRET CLOSS Kprex 2EACE- SK ;
Ree Se, Cbrsewne- SA EBL xz, eee Ace, ma ste B

