
--- Page 1 ---
oe F

- Guben, believed to be 8 nesber of a group of vealthy anti-CASTAO Cubans, |
'. Menbers.of- which have talked to Mr, Pauley recently about their

' dated 2-October. The second
of operational interest to Station Hehana, and a separate menor endim
ot ae subaisted on that: conversation,  _ .

and moneys. he pointed out that Cubans in Cuba are afraid’ to start an .
| underground movement, and there was no way to raise funds, etc. My,
-. Pawley gave him no encouragement on the money angle, saying that even

- ££ there were Americais willing to rag the risk of becoming involved
'. ° dn Cuban yevolutionary activities by furnishing LB ee
- ovement, which he doubted, he felt that at the present time it “would fe

- -'(1) there is no-unity among the anti-CASTRO groups, and there are ab.
"Least 10 that he news of who are working absolutely independently of |
‘one anothers and (2) CASTRO ie in cotitrol of the country and has the |

_ support of
‘Vir. Pawley said he felt the Cuban economic situation was. worsening .

‘tetened to the play-back of a tape, brought to Washington from Man,
' recording of Mr. Pawley's conversations with two Gubans during the

7 “ppoke indistinctly, was difficult to understand. He mentioned a. :
_ meeting "with some af our prople who came up from Cuba” to discuss ha de
. - plang. Re said his group had been contacted by a representative of
General Jose: Eleutorio PEDMAZA, leader of Cuban revolutionary groups -
. “dn the Dominican Oo
_: hed taken and was told that they had 4 plan “to start sabotage". The -
“_S Guban. ead the PRDRAZA xepresentative eaid thelr group (the PEDRAZA
"-_. group) had four. provinces organised in Cuba, mentioning Camaguey and. .-
.- .. Santa Clara, and that: they had ‘two provinces yet to be organised awe
oo. Habana and Hatensan..: o

_ tyrn on CASPROs but until that time comes it.would be | dangerous, to
“yt to > organise a rewolutionary movements oe ; 7

Thro4-10043-10362 | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |

2
.

an

20 October 1959 -

Highlights of Tape-Retorded Conversation in Miami Between
Mrs, aaa cokanee” ond om Unidentified Cubs during -
eriod 17-15 October oe

2 ‘Gs 20.Octabay the undersigned end Owen Foust, of WH/3

‘end given to Colonel King King by Mr. Pawley on 19 October, which was a

period 17-18 October. The first conversation was with an onidentified

plane for. sabotage. of the the coming suger harvest ag reported in UA32 :
Gaban vao AMPACAol, a Cuban journalist

“B. the ‘iaclaiessd Ocuen, to ind smechah of oa ‘aacexs oa”

Republic, who wanted to know what action their ~~

gaa eava gua be row nened' tro @itngp <> moval booking

money for such 2a -
be. like "putting money down.a rat-hole" for the following reasonss.

a large number of Cubans, especially the a

fast and that if it gets bad enough, a large number of Cubans will

| SET

QO P7378



--- Page 2 ---
~

he Mr. Pawley asked the Ouban if his group felt they had moral
- gupport ef. the Us %. and the Cuban replied thatcthey wanted U. 5.

‘moral, support: but whether they had it or not, thay felt they were

obliged to carry through with their plans. Mr. Pawley said he didn't

. know.what to tell him —= would have to think about it and see if any~

thing cevuld be done. He aaid, “having been connected with the U. 5.

'- Governments I:can't ges. involved in revolutionary movements", Algo .
~" gadd-he would hate to. see the Dominican Government got involved, .
" which might be difficult te avoid with so many Cuban exiles there, = ~~
_ bat consented: that ‘he vader stood "the Dominican Sovernent. haan! ¢ | Dol.

SER


