
--- Page 1 ---
RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 ]

Je a t . am

ios “4

Cea
.——

28 January 1963
‘ : MEMORANDUH FOR Refi’
SURSRLT: Cuba

The Executive Coumittee met on Friday, January 25th, and
approved the rew policy as outlined by the Coov'inator,

ei ston cape nggenr nee

Dacisions bearing on cuvert operations were ceached as follows:

1. The Special Group will have the responsibility of
continuing review of thé program for infiltration of covert intelli-
pence avents. Progress will be regularly check-d with the Group.

: Higher authority wade a particular point of saying that, although
i the objective of ‘intensified covart collection" is approved,
nonethsless, CIA ahould not feel it €8 under pressura to "yet good
men killed" in the -rocess. In other words, the advantages to be
gained from Lntenatited collection must be continually veighed
sgeinst the risks. This will be done by the Special Group.

2. The ectorney General expressed great interest in the
extent to which key members of tho Brigade will be brought into
planning and current operations. He thought that they should be
thoroughly consulted on plans for tntelligence teams and he indicated
that he will personally keep an eye on progress in this regard.

3. The use of propaganda balloons was disapproved at this
time. It apparently was not clear as to exactly how far CIA should
go in maintaining its current capability for launching balloors.

ww irtrere

At Mr. Bundy's suggestion I had a long talk with Cottrell on
Saturday, the 26th. We discussed in particular the method of operation
with the Brigade. I pointed out some of the security aspects that
would have to be watched, but expressed the opinion that a workable
method of operation could be devised so that the Brigade lesders
could provide motivation and could feel a sense of participation,
without having to bring them so closely tnto the details of target
areas, dispatch, comme , etc., as to constitute a security hazard.

I cited the Agency's experience with the NTS as a possible guideline
in this regard. We agreed that after Mr. FitzGerald returns from
Panama, about the first of February, the three of us should discuss
thie matter further.

TAP



--- Page 2 ---
" SECRET
EYES ONLY

8 February 1963

MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD

SUBJECT: Minutes of Meeting of the Special Group, 8 February 1963

_ PRESENT: Mr. Bundy, Mr. Gilpatric, Mr. McCone, Mr. Hilsman,

and Mr, FitzGerald

1. Agent Operations in Cuba

Mr. FitzGerald discussed with the Group the CIA paper of
6 February which recommends a total of five maritime infiltration/
exfiltration operations during the next thirty days.

He emphasized that these black operations are entirely of an
intelligence nature and that they should be viewed only as a
supplement to intelligence coverage accomplished by other means.
In the. latter connection, the point was made that information ob-
tained by agents of this type can contribute to the targeting of
aerial reconnaissance sorties and can assist in making the process
of photo interpretation more meaningful... _

Mr. FitzGerald also emphasized that the teams now proposed

are comprised of only one to three agents. He noted that the agents

available are particularly well motivated, and that those whose
primary motivation was toward action rather than intelligence have
been weeded out.

The consensus of the Group was that while agent operations of
this type cannot be considered as a primary or major source of
intelligence, nonetheless this type of operation is consistent
with U.S. objectives in the Cuba situation and that approval of
these five should be recommended.

(These missions were approved by higher authority, 9 February
1963)

fl " Subsidy ¢ to Venezuelan n Newspaper -

Mr. McCone reported on financial arrangements which have been
made in connection with subsidy of the Venezuelan newspaper, which

SECRET
EYES ONLY


--- Page 3 ---
OO + SECRET
: | EYES ONLY

-~-2-

; gb

{es approved at® the meeting of 31 January 1963. He said that Agency m

‘funds on deposit with the Morgan Guaranty, which will serve as A
“ collateral against the bank's loan to the new entrepreneur of this |
newspaper, would draw interest at 4%, while the purchaser will pay /
the commercial rate of 6%. The Chairman expressed satisfaction i
with this arrangement; f .

weet Parrott

Distribution
Mr. Johnson
Mr. Gilpatric
Mr. McCone

SECRET
EYES ONLY


--- Page 4 ---
1 3;00000

‘| probably not reach the kind of military target Mr. McCone had in mind.

- SECRET
EYES ONLY.

28 February 1963

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Minutes of Meeting of the Special Group, 28 February 1963
PRESENT: Mr. Bundy, Mr. Johnson, Mr. Gilpatric, and Mr. McCone

Colonel Steakley was present for Items 1-3

Co gg a
[/ Reconnaissance = DOD winehig Forecast .
d The Group had no objection to the BOW TIE missions as planned.
Mr. .McCone alluded, however, to. the unexplained military activity
| that is going on in eastern China, and asked about the capability of
: BOW TIE to check on this. It was pointed out that the BOW TIE
| program consists of comparatively shallow penetration which would

1

Accordingly, Colonel Steakley was asked to confer with COMOR to find
out whether requirements exist for deeper penetration in the area,
and if so to bring in an appropriate proposal to the Special -Group.

In connection with project AMOS, Mr. Johnson read a message from
Lord Home to the Secretary of State. Home said that while the RAF
and the Air Ministry will be glad to have the advantage of the
intelligence resulting from the mission, nonetheless this represents
a departure from the previous pattern of flights in the area.
Additionally, the flight will, according to Home, go closer 'to the H
coast than the RAF is allowed to go. He was willing to agree to the
mission, provided it was not viewed as establishing a precedent, and
on the. stipulation that Secretary Rusk personally accepts the risk
entailed, Mr. Johnson said that Secretary Rusk is willing to accept
this risk. : ;

The Group approved AMOS, subject to check by Mr. Bundy with
higher authority, and on the understanding that the Group will have
a chance to take a last look at it shortly before the scheduled date
of 19 March. Colonel Steakley was also asked to report to the Group
on the results of the mission. (This mission was later approved by
higher authority.)

In this connection, Mr. McCone commented on the great importance
of obtaining intelligence on the Soviet low-level SA-3 system. The |
Group agreed that thisis a high-priority requirement, in order to] ,

EYES ONLY,


--- Page 5 ---
13-00000

al
EVES ONLY

-2-

provide a basis for estimating accurately the chances for successful
ow+level penetration of the USSR. Mr. McCone will arrange to have
a USIB paper prepared on this subject.

The Group noted the DESOTO destroyer voyage, which will now in-
clude a courtesy call at Djakarta.

Colonel Steakley told the Group that CINCLANT has tried out the
MELON PATCH photography missions, operating under the ten mile re-
striction which was laid on by the Special Group at its meeting of
31 January. It is now apparent to CINCLANT that adequate photography
of the desired areas cannot be obtained at that distance. The Group
agreed that the ten mile restriction should remain in force. In ft
coming to this conclusion they made the point that in case of real
need for this type of coastal intelligence, there ‘would be adequate
time to obtain it after an emergency actually was in effect; .and
further, any such information collected now would have to be up-dated
before operations could be mounted based on it. i

The revised RED DOG missions, to be flown in C-47's, and the ii
proposal to fly some BRASS KNOB missions from the Canal Zone, were ,
approved,

Colonel Steakley was asked to give the Group a report on the i
results obtained from the last mission into the Sea of Okhotsk.

Colonel Steakley told the Group that the JCS will make no
recommendation on low-level coverage of Laos (ABLE MABEL) until after
the results of the Agency effort explained below.

The Group made a point of saying that although the time is not
tiow propitious. for covering the COMOR priority targets in Cuba with |
low-level flights, it may well prove desirable to do this on fairly i
short notice. Therefore this matter should be kept under constant :
review by operating elements.)

2. | Reconnaissance ~- CIA Monthly porecas? |

Mr. McCone told the Group that the weather has suddenly opened :
up over North Vietnam and that the mission to cover that area, via :
Laos, which was approved by tlie Special Group on 17 January, will 4
actually be launched tonight. He said that after this is completed !
the airplane will be ferried to Taiwan in accordance with the dis-
cussion at the meeting of the 25th of February, transiting Laos on
the way. Mr. McCone also reported on. the recent successful GROSBEAK
mission. . . _ at

SEAL
SEERET

EYES ONLY pe


--- Page 6 ---
13-00000

but that he will have it studied further.

SEGRET
EYES ONLY

-3-

pone gwen ee GE ee

2. [omvas of Soviet Troops

; “Mr. McCone said that we still do not know very much about the
‘removal of Soviet troops from Cuba. Mr. Bundy stated that the :
official government position is that available information is in- ©
sufficient to justify any change in the estimated figures of Soviets
on the island. He added that no change can be made in these © figures,
without spe c approval by. higher authority. 7... . wreouE7

at

4. Testimony on Cuba

Mr. McCone commented on the difficulties encountered by
officials who are required to testify. before Congressional committees
on the Cuban situation, in light of the propensity of these committees
to question witnesses on statements made by other officials. Mr.
Bundy recognized that this is a problem and said that in an attempt
to alleviate it he has had several documents brought together. These
include a compendium of the President's remarks on the subject; the
DCL's report to the Killian Committee; a report by Assistant Secretary
Martin; and most recently, the CIA-prepared paper on subversion in
the hemisphere. He added that the basic responsibility for co-
ordinating public statements rests with the Secretary « of State.

a eee eo — . : . |

GS :
5. {Italy = = ‘Status Report on Election Operation '

The Group noted that this project is progressing, but is still
in its early stages. 7] : ‘j

“6. '[Ghite - Proposed Political acticg? "

: The Group approved the proposal dated 25 February, sub ject to
approval by higher authority. (This was later granted.) 7

7. [Agency Operations in Latin America 98

eo Mr. Gilpatric inquired as to the feasibility of mounting

intelligence or other operations against selected military personnel ,
in Latin America. Mr. McCone said that some of this is being done

ae

8. ~Y Progress on Cuban Operations

Mr. McCone told the Group that none of the five agent operations
approved by the Group on the 8th of February has been successful.
He noted that there have been a number of aborts due to weather,

ceeaey
EYES ONLY

Vac


--- Page 7 ---
13-00000

3)
EYES ONLY,

-4-

failure of equipment, and failure of rendezvous plans, He said
that efforts are continuing to carry out these operations success-
fully, but indicated some unhappiness with the results to date and
the prospects of success. He alluded particularly to the qualities
of the agent personnel. :

with”

Thomas A. Parrott

Distribution
Mr. Johnson
Mr. Gilpatric .
‘Mr. McCone


--- Page 8 ---
et EN NBR Rh ea era ta et eet tase ie,

Sainte be Bee teat tase eM ere EEL nee:

13-0900 Qerysissuvmexamamarsu erin escand ar serena st

oe. a -

14 March 1963

MEMORANDUM FOR MEMBERS OF THE SPECIAL GROUP

SUBJECT: Approval of Cuba Papers

All members of the Special Group have now approved the
following memoranda from the Coordinator of Cuban Affairs:

a. "Covert Propaganda to Stimulate Passive Resistance
and Low-Risk, Simple Sabotage," 8 March 1963.

b. "Proposed Infiltration/Exfiltration Operations in
Cuba ~ 15 March 1963 to 15 April 1963," 11 March 1963.

wink

Thomas A. Parrott

Distribution
Mr. Johnson
Mr. Gilpatric
Mr. McCone



--- Page 9 ---
26 March 1963

MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD ©
SUBJECT: Minutes of Meeting of the Special Group, 26 March 1963
PRESENT: Mr. Bundy, Mr. Johnson, Mr. Gilpatric, and Mr. McCone.

Dr. Scoville, Mr. McMillan, and Colonel Steakley were
. present for Items 1-5.

Mr. Lundahl was present for Item 1.

Mr. FitzGerald was present for Item 5.

1s cee a Reconnaissance, Cuba

In connection with the USIB recommendation for resumption of
low-level coverage of Cuba, Mr. Lundahl showed the Group examples
of the additional information that can be obtained from low-level
photography as contrasted with high-level coverage. This had to do
particularly with identification of materiel, spotting of personnel,
etc.

Mr. McCone emphasized that low-level coverage would give us fl
additional information on the numbers of Soviet troops and possibly i
on Soviet intentions, and similar subjects, but that it would not ,
represent a qualitative shift in the body of intelligence available.
It would. not reveal anything that would be of major security interest '
to the U.S. and which could not be picked up by high-level coverage.

Mr. McCone also referred to the progress of certain negotiations
which have been holding up active consideration of low-level photo- |
graphy. He said that there are differences of opinion among people :
closest to this situation as to what the effect of resumption of such
photography actually might be on the negotiations.

Mr. Gilpatric said that Defense is not convinced of the urgency
of this proposition and would not favor it at. this time, unless others
feel that there is an overriding political reason for.undertaking the
project. He said that he would prefer to see this capability reserved
for identifying the type of threat that we might otherwise not be
aware of, or used at a time when there was some political advantage to :
be gained by low-level flights. 7 Jl

eres SESS STR See special minutes
or additional Item



--- Page 10 ---
that-there is any foreign policy reason for mounting the operation e
at this time, and in fact the Secretary and other high officials in

the Department feel that from a policy point of view it would be
inadvisable now.

The Group then agreed that the resumption of low-level coverage
would not be recommended at this time, but that it would be kept
under weekly review. ]

96

2. {Reconnaissance Indonesia

The Group noted the intelligence justification for this proposal
and the political objections to it, and the Chairman agreed to discuss |
it with higher authority as an example of a situation where clear-cut ,
differences of interest exist. He said that if there was any doubt :
from that quarter he. would have all the principals participate in
further discussion with higher authority. (The proposal was later

. disapproved by higher authority.) ] y ;
- G9.

3. [ Peripheral Reconnaissance Operations :

a. Colonel Steakley gave the following brief reports on a 2 og
number of peripheral missions:

(1) The ELINT coverage of.the; Sea of Okhotsk produced good
results. He said that this area is now so well covered with
radars that consideration should probably be given as to whether
the rules requiring an abort in case of an AI lock-on should be
relaxed. . : ,

(2) The AMOS mission, directed against SA-3's in the
Baltic, did not result in any ELINT take from the radars
associated with the SA-3's. He said that some question now
arises as to whether these weapons are in fact. SA~3's or
perhaps a later generation of the SA-2. _

(3) A DESOTO destroyer mission off the Soviet Maritime
Provinces resulted in Soviet instructions to shut down their
radars when the ship approached.

b. The Group approved four missions (UNA, DANIEL, FLOYD and
GEORGE) using new ASD-1 equipment. This includes two in the Baltic :
area, one in the Black Sea, and one flying from England to the Black

Sea.7



--- Page 11 ---
13-00000

4. [zune Balloons 78 NT tees

a

Dr. Scoville gave the Group details of the operation in the i
; Sea of Japan, employing balloons against TALL KING radars. He said ‘

_ " that the results indicate that perhaps these radars are not as

efficient as we had thought , but that further analysis is Proceeding.

5. Covert “operations, Cuba

a. Procedures

Noting that the shipping sabotage paper of 19 March had
not been considered by the Cottrell committee as a body, the Special
Group asked that such proposals be considered in that way before
submission to the Special Group. In passing the recommendations to
the Special Group it should be indicated what the position of the
various Cottrell members was, just as is done in the case of political
projects coordinated with State and the ambassador. Each member of
the Cottrell committee would see to it that his own agency staffed
the paper in the normal way for submission to the Special Group.

b. Sabotage of Shipping

The substance of the 19 March paper was then considered.
Mr. McCone raised a question as to exactly what the U.S. objective
now is in this and related fields, and questioned in addition whether
we may be trying to manage exile groups too closely.

There was some discussion as tothe actual value of carrying
out the proposed sabotage, that is whether enough damage could be
done to hurt the Castro regime seriously. The consensus of the Group
seemed to be that activity of this kind should not be undertaken if
it could be expected to yield only small gains, but that if its
effect would be really significant then that would be a different
matter.

Considerable doubt was expressed. about the proposal for
sinking and setting fire to ships. None of the members felt that
there was any particular objection to the use of abrasives or other
damaging materials. . ;

The proposal was then remanded for group consideration by
the Cottrell committee. This committee is asked to look at the pro-
posal in relation toeeverything else that is going on or is under
serious consideration, in order to assess its true potentiality.

Mr. FitzGerald was authorized to modify the proposal to the extent



--- Page 12 ---
VP-0000Qaes:-anesmmaiansnns iecewnat

of considering possible unilateral action as opposed to using an
exile group as a cutout. Mr. Bundy will explore exactly what the
feeling of higher authority is with respect to relations with exile

groups.

Ce Additional Programs

Mr. Johnson mentioned the activities of the NTS, which has

.been broadcasting in Russian to the Soviet troops over. Radio Caribe

in the Dominican Republic. Mr. FitzGerald agreed to add this to the
possibilities listed under radio broadcasting.

Mr. Johnson questioned the extent to which proposition b.,
involving inciting Cubans to commit aggressive acts against Soviet
personnel, is in accord with current objectives.

On the matter of propaganda balloons, most members of the
Group felt that these might be useful in connection with the particular
target mentioned - the May Day concentration which is expected in Havana,
Mr. Johnson had some reservations which he wanted to check out further
in the Department. It was agreed that should State take a favorable
view, then the matter would be presented to higher authority.

As to the request for Defense training facilities, Mr.

_ Gilpatric asked that Mr. FitzGerald discuss the needs with Secretary

Vance. Mr. FitzGerald said that the principal requirement which can-
not be met in CIA facilities is adequate space for weapons training.
Members of the Group recalled that the objection to the use of Defense
facilities at the time it was presented during the MONGOOSE period,
was that this would. make it difficult, if not impossible, to deny
official U.S. involvement. Mr. Bundy said that he saw no objection
if the purpose was to train Cubans for eventual open hostilities, but
thought that in this case the objective might be better achieved by
having them undergo regular U.S. Army training. The other members

agreed,
et Parrott
Distribution
Mr. Johnson

Mr. Gilpatric
Mr. McCone



--- Page 13 ---
° GUM LEO LLL:

Handle Via Indicated Controls

gh
(BYEMAN)

on :
ned in occordance with regulations pertaining to the designated controls.

This document contains information referring to Projects:

SHH TPHHHOHNHNHHY

OY
:

5

y

F

i

NSSSOOON


--- Page 14 ---
“I

4y

4

4 April 1963

MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD
SUBJECT: Minutes of Meeting of the Special Group, 4 April 1963
PRESENT: Mr. Bundy, Mr. Gilpatric, Mr. McCone, Mr. Hughes

Dr. Scoville and Colonel Steakley were present for
tems 1 and 2.

Commander. Yates was present for Item l.

The DOD monthly forecast of peripheral reconnaissance activities
was noted. Special note was taken of mission ULCER GULCH, which all
members approved. Consideration of YANKEE PASHA was deferred for at
least a week because of certain points raised by the Secretary of
State. Mr. Bundy said that he himself would normally have no objection
to this operation but that conditions at the moment make it in-
advisable to go ahead at this precise time.

[pon Peripheral Reconnaissance

Colonel Steakley was asked to brief the Group on the special
navigational safeguards which would be used in the YANKEE PASHA
operation, at a later meeting whén Mr. Johnson could bef present.

Commander Yates briefed the Group on certain submarine operations.
Mr. Gilpatric undertook to assure himself. that adequate: procedures

exist for notifying members of the Special Group and other key officials

in the event of an untoward incident. ]

[Reconnaissance Missions, Far East gs

Mr. McCone briefed the Group on the results of two recent missions.

He pointed out that there are now no authorizations oagseaness for

high-performance reconnaissance in the Far East.

The recommendations in the NRO paper for the Special Group, dated
4 April, were approved with the exception of 7. b (Lao), which was
deferred for later consideration, Mr. McCone agreed to mention these
approvals to higher authority, but it was felt that no further formal
approval was required]



--- Page 15 ---
13-00000

7

po EVES ONLY

-2-

GB
i (au members of the Group expressed their interest in gétting on
with plans for resuming FALCON missions. It was noted that one of the}
i) principal problems in this area is the question of a base, It was |
/ agreed that we should probably approach this from the point of view :
of obtaining a standby agreement with the Indian Government to permit |
staging in and out of that country. Dr. Scoville said that a message r
‘had gone out to the field on this point last night. The Chairman \
asked that word be sent to the Ambassador that high-level interest :
» in this proposition does exist in Washington. "]

3.5 (Status Report on’ ftalian ‘Elect ions 4
CIA's paper ‘of 1 April was noted. ]

1

4. (Low-Level necondAssance Cuba

' The Group took no action on this sub ject J : 4

5. “(Govert Subsidy for Kong 72 it

cao) At Mr. Hughes' suggestion, it was agreed that CIA should look into
> the possibilities of a covert payment | to Kong Le] : au

6. “Cuban Operations

The Group recommended approval of the following papers from the
Coordinator of Cuban Affairs:

a. Sabotage of Shipping, 19 March, as amended by a
memorandum from the Deputy Coordinator, 2 April 1963.

_b. Russian Language Broadcasts, 2 April 1963.

c. Propaganda Inciting Cubans within Cuba to Attack
Soviet Troops, 2 April 1963.

Mr. Bundy and Mr. FitzGerald will obtain final approval from

higher authority.
Thomas \ . ed

Distribution
Mr. Johnson
Mr. Gilpatric
Mr. McCone



--- Page 16 ---
13-00000

SEC y

9 April 1963

MEMORANDUM FOR MEMBERS OF THE SPECIAL GROUP

SUBJECT: Status of Approvals for Covert Actions, Cuba

1. Propaganda Inciting Cubans to Commit Acts Against Soviet
Troops :

Approved by higher authority, on the understanding that.
the propaganda will be non-attributable to the United States.

2. Sabotage of Cuban-Owned Shipping
This was approved by higher authority. It -was noted that

"the suggestion for external explosive charges had been deleted from

the proposal approved by the Special Group last week. (This will
be considered along with other suggestions in an over-all sabotage
paper, in accordance with decisions reached at the special meeting
of 3 April.)

3. Soviet. Language Broadcasts

: The Radio Liberty proposition has been approved, with the
understanding that there will be no "opening fanfare" in connection
with the inauguration of the program; if a ceremony is unavoidable

it must be played in a low key. The proposal for a Unidad Revolucion-
aria program is disapproved. The suggestion for intrusion on Radio
Moscow broadcasts is disapproved.

4. Leaflet Balloons

This proposal has been disapproved by higher authority.

Thomas p Parrott

Distribution
Mr. Johnson
Mr. Gilpatric
Mr. McCone

SECRET
EYES ONLY


--- Page 17 ---
i

rane] ’
a EYES NLY wae

11 April 1963

MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD
SUBJECT: Minutes of Meeting of the Special Group, 11 April 1963
PRESENT: Mr. Bundy, Mr. Johnson, Mr. McCone

Dr. Scoville, Colonel Ledford and Colonel Steakley
were present for Items 1 - 3.

Mr. FitzGerald was present for Item 4,

1. nconsatssanes Northern Laos 96

: It was agreed that the proposal for this coverage, which was
contained in the NRO paper of 4 April and which was deferred last
week, should be approved.

Mr. McCone mentioned the difficulties which have arisen with
Sarit, noting particularly that he is unwilling to give permission
for the renewed use of Takhli until certain Thai officials return
to Bangkok from Paris, which will be around the 20th of this month,
Mr. McCone mentioned the possibility of basing the aircraft in the
Philippines or Taiwan, if the Takhli possibility should fall through
completely.

The DCI said that if it proves impossible to mount missions
designed to cover the Sino-Indian border, then three will be required
for Laos and North Vietnam. If on the other hand the Sino-Indian
missions are run, then only two additional ones. would be required to
cover Laos and North Vietnam, since some of the area could be covered
in the process of the Sino-Indian coverage.

Mr. Bundy will clear these proposals with higher authority.]

Feoverane of Sino-Indian Border Area 96

Dr. Scoville reported on the difficulties encountered in ob-
taining Indian approval for staging aircraft through that country,
stressing the fact that the chief of the intelligence service will
not be available in India until the 16th of this month, and no
decision can be expected before then, He said that the time before
the onset of the monsoon season is getting short. Dr. Scoville said 4
that efforts are continuing to get staging approval from the Indians, Q
as well as approval from the Thais to base in Takh1i.)

creT

Lae


--- Page 18 ---
. “inadvertent overflights of Soviet territory by U.S. reconnaissance
, aircraft, since January 1961.

4. Cuban Operations :

* SECRET =.
EYES ONLY a

-2-

3. (Znadvertent Over lights by Reconnaissance Aircraft :

Colonel Steakley distributed a. memorandum listing the four

He commented that in previous years the rate of such incidents

: was considerably higher. Mr. Bundy asked him to provide for the Group |

in the next week or so a recapitulation of such incidents, going back
to approximately 1949.

Colonel Steakley said that both CINCPAC and the Joint Reconnais- 4
sance Group believe that the incident of 10 April, when an ELINI — :
aircraft flew over one of the Kuriles, appears to represent a violation:
of established procedures and instructions. CINCPAC has asked for
a full report.

Mr. McCone questioned the efficacy of the system of advising \
Special Group members of such incidents. Colonél Steakley said that ;
a procedure has been specified and he undertook to provide a copy to :
‘Mr. Parrott for the information of the Group. He said that he would \
take Special measures _ tamake sure that these instruct ions are followed./ |

Mr. FitzGerald expanded orally on the paper of 9 April, giving
a summary of the recent results in the agent infiltration program,
and outlining proposals in this field for the next month, The Group
approved this projection. In response to.a question about the status
of Manolo Ray's people, Mr. FitzGerald said that CIA was in touch with
him from time to time, and that any plan he has to offer for activity
against Cuba will be sympathetically received, but that he has not to
date come up with any such proposal.

The comments from the Coordinator of Cuban Affairs, dated 11 April,
on the three papers being considered at today's meeting were noted.
The Group requested that these comments be withdrawn and destroyed
for security reasons, With specific reference to the comment that a
proposed. sabotage action should not be carried out on the target date
of the 20th or 21st of April, Mr. FitzGerald pointed out that this date
had been set before the status of the Donovan negotiations was known.
He said that of course no activity of this kind would be allowed to
interfere with those negotiations at this stage.

There then ensued a lengthy. discussion of the entire question of
sabotage, The Group agreed that the papers before it were responsive
to requests which had been levied on CIA to come up with general and
specific proposals. On the other hand, all members of the Group
recognized that a searching examination must be undertaken in the light

EYES ONLY
. | Ve


--- Page 19 ---
SEORET .
EYES ONLY 7

&3-

of all pertinent factors, to determine whether we wish to change the
present policy. It was agreed that in order to provide a firm basis
for judgment, we must get a clearer picture of capabilities, of the
prospects of success, the extent of benefits to be gained from

. successful operations, the dangers of repercussions and of reprisals,

etc., etc.

With respect to external operations to be mounted by exile groups,
it was agreed that this sort of activity poses a real dilemma.
Particularly in view of the recently-enunciated policy toward exile
raids, it becomes increasingly difficult to disavow plausibly
responsibility for such acts. The U.S. is thus placed in the position
of either appearing to be ineffective in controlling the exiles or
of beazing the onus of active involvement in the operations.

Mr. McCone expressed great skepticism about the desirability of
proceeding with sabotage operations, to include training, until an
over-all policy is made clear on steps to be taken to assure the re-
moval of Soviet troops and on the problem of Castro. He also com-
mented on the ineffectiveness of Cuban agents and the fact that they
would undoubtedly talk if captured, Mr. FitzGerald confirmed the
second point, but felt that these particular Cubans are perhaps more
effective than the usual run.

It was decided that. probably Friday, the 19th of April, a pre-
sentation should be made to higher authority at which time all
responsible individuals should have an opportunity to express their
views. A paper will be prepared, outlining: a proposed broad program
for sabotage as well as examples of specific operations; a sense of
the seale of activity which could reasonably be expected and the
benefits from it; an estimate of what could be achieved by the use of
internal assets; possible repercussions; and how such activity would
fit into overall policy. CIA is to coordinate with State in the
Preparation of this Paper. cpetege ogee esac ewe fe weet

Gg

(Annexes to Internal Defense Plans

” The Colombia annex was. noted. In view of the fact that the
basic IDP for Bolivia had earlier been remanded for revision by the
Special Group (CI), the covert annex for that country was held over
until the overt plan is considered by the CI Group."]

6. [forth Vietnam operation © f

The monthly report was noted and approved.] —

crPRET
EYES ONLY


--- Page 20 ---
_ SEORET —_

EYES ONLY Be lig

18 April 1963

Ee. 63-3478

SUBJECT: Minutes. of Meeting of the Special Group, 18 April 1963

MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD

PRESENT: Mr. Bundy, Mr. Johnson, Mr. Gilpatric, and Mr. McCone

The Attorney General, General Taylor, Mr. Murrow, and
Mr. FitzGerald were present for Item 1.

1. Cuban Operations

Mr. FitzGerald said that in view of the postponement of the
meeting tentatively set for tomorrow with higher authority, the
proposed sabotage actions for April will be cancelled and two caching —
operations, in Pinar del Rio and Matanzas, will be substituted. The
Group approved this.

Mr. FitzGerald told the Group that in view of the negative
decision on balloons, he was proposing to dismantle the capability,
which is expensive to keep in being. He said that if it were desired
to start the program up at any time after dismantling, it would take
about three months. A number of members of the Group felt that in a
real crisis balloons could be of considerable value. Accordingly, it
was agreed that balloons and helium should be stockpiled, with the
idea that if a situation should arise in which balloons would be use-
ful, launching could be accomplished by a'U.S. vessel, without worrying
too much about attribution under those circumstances. In commenting
on his opposition to the earlier proposition, Mr. Murrow said that he
believes that balloons can be useful as a part of an integrated

program.

The Group then turned to discussion of the papers from the Co-
ordinator of Cuban Affairs dated April 16th, 17th, and 18th. It was
noted that there had not been time for adequate staffing of these papers
and that the principals had not been able to examine them carefully.
In this connection, Mr. McCone said that he wanted the Office of
National Estimates of CIA to review the papers, in light of their
estimative content. It was thus agreed that the papers should be
staffed and sharpened up for presentation at next week's meeting. Mr.
Johnson suggested that a possible format might be to produce one paper
which would be prefaced by the guidelines currently contained in the
Coordinator's paper of April 18th. This would be followed by a

‘summary of sabotage capabilities and the pros and cons of various

types, and then recommendations.

SECRET
EYES ONLY


--- Page 21 ---
. ” SECRET ~
EYES ONLY

-2-

Mr. Bundy and Mr, McCone expressed some doubts as to whether we
are in a position to decide major problems of this type until we
have a clearer picture of what the over-all policy toward Cuba is
likely to be for the next six months to a year and a half. Mr. Bundy
pointed out that the noise level which would be involved in many of
these proposals would be considerably more than it has been to date,
and he felt that we must decide whether we are willing to accept this.
He added that he did not feel that such a development would necessarily
be bad, but it would certainly be different from the low-level
activities prevailing now. He was not’ sure whether, or to what extent,
it would be possible to embark on the activities proposed in the
Coordinator's papers, without a drastic change in U.S. policy. In this
connection, Mr. Johnson said that he particularly likes the proposals
for supporting internal resistance operations, since these will not
generate a high noise level.

Mr. FitzGerald pointed out that the paper of April 17th, on a
"Maximum Covert Action Program" consists basically of sabotage and
harassment, plus support to Cuban exile groups and individuals who
may be responsive to our advice but certainly not to our command,

He mentioned some of the difficulties that would flow from supporting
one group and not others. Mr. McCone said that if such groups become
active, it will be obvious that they have U.S. support because it is
well known that they do not have adequate assets now. He and Mr.
Bundy agreed that, despite the fact that some Central American govern-
ments might be used as cutouts, the U.S, would be blamed for their
activities and this must be clearly recognized before embarking on
such a course. They felt additionally that we must be sure that such
a program would contribute to over-all policy objectives.

Mr. McCone and Mr. FitzGerald referred to the CIA estimate that
time is:running in favor of Castro, and Mr. FitzGerald ‘said that
some of these activities are designed to slow down or, possible stop
the trend of events in his favor. 2%

“
It was noted that the program for shipping sabotage, which has
already been approved, is in process of possible implepacacion, Tt
was agreed that this process should not be interrupte a

- | (Reconnaissance of Laos) 7 g ~ WO ot

v 4

£

A COMOR paper, suggesting that certain targets in Southern Laos
‘be included in the proposed missions for Northern Laos,-was distributed

' and no objection was expressed to it. Mr. Bundy noted that he had not '
' yet had an opportunity to clear the oréginal proposal veh higher ;
: authority. ] a

oe

SECRET
EYES ONLY.

ae


--- Page 22 ---
: ~ approved mT)

25 April 1963 .

MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD
SUBJECT: . Minutes of Meeting of the Special Group, 25 April 1963
PRESENT: Mr. Bundy, Mr. Johnson, Mr. Gilpatric, and ‘Mr. McCone.

Dr. Scoville and Colonel Steakley were present for
Items 1-4. ; -t

Mr. FitzGerald was present for Items 1-5.
Mr. Jorgensen was present for Item 3.

Mr. Tweedy was present for Item 6.

1. ‘(Eesscost of NRO Activities for May

. This forecast was noted-]
2. - [Reconnaissance of Laos and Vietnam 98

“Mr. McCone referred to a paper prepared by the JCS at the

, request of the Secretary of Defense, outlining a possible schedule

of reconnaissance missions over Laos and Vietnam, which seemed to
Mr. McCone to be unduly heavy. Mr. Gilpatric explained that the
paper had been drawn up as an annex to a draft contingency plan,

and was responsive to a direct request from the Secretary of Defense
to indicate a sizeable capability for high-level reconnaissance for
intelligence purposes, Mr. Gilpatric added that it is clearly under-
stood that such activity would not represent a "show of force," and
that the latter would requfre low-level activity. Mr. McCone agreed
with this peint and emphasized the unusual sensitivity of any high-
level reconnaissance of denied areas.

Mr. Gilpatric assured the Group that these plans are all of a
contingency nature and that at this point they are by no means

GS

(@roposea “"Feint' Operations, GROSBEAK

Mr. Jorgensen summarized the paper of the 22nd of April. He

said that these proposals are frankly regarded as experimental.’

SECRET
EYES ONLY -


--- Page 23 ---
C

SECRET.
FYES ONLY

-2-

73

3 (Cotone Steakley said that from the JCS point of view, such

| feints might represent a tactical advantage, in that they could

| divert enemy defenses from actual operations. On the other hand,

' the JCS procedures are designed so as not to be provocative in
connection with peripheral and BOW TIE missions. He felt that. this
proposal, which is frankly designed to be provocative, could have
the effect of inducing quicker and more intensive reaction to the
JCS flights.

On the understanding that the feint activities would be closely
coordinated with military missions in the area, it was agreed that
the proposed program should be tried for the month of May. At the
end of this period, a report on the results will be made to the
Special Group. ]

4.0 (Low-Level Reconnaissance, Cuba 9

a The DCL said the USIB unanimously reaffirmed yesterday the

- priority intelligence requirements for low-level coverage of Cuba.
Mr. Bundy added that there is high-level interest in reviewing this
' situation. .

Mr. Johnson said that in the view of the Bureau of Intelligence
and Research of the State Department, the Soviets would interpret
a resumption of low-level flights as an indication of the adoption
by the U.S, of a harder line toward Cuba. More significantly,
Ambassador Thompson is very much opposed to such resumption at this
time; he feels that this could result in a reduction in the rate of
_withdrawal of Soviet troops or a Soviet decision to withdraw none at
all in the future, and it might affect Soviet policy in Laos in a

manner adverse to U.S, interests. The importance of the Harriman. :

mission with respect to this last proposition was noted. Mr. Johnson
said we should know the results of the Harriman mission in a day or
* two.

: It was agreed that the matter would be discussed with higher
. authority this afternoon]

5. Proposed ‘New Policy and Program toward Cuba

Mr. McCone opened the discussion of this topic by pointing out
that the overt and multilateral pressures now being applied to Cuba
are useful; on the other hand, while they will slow Castro down they
will not hurt him critically, and the interest of our allies in
maintaining such pressures will almost certainly erode as time passes.
Similarly, any sabotage program can hurt the Castro government, but
not lethally; and in order to be effective at all, it must be done on

SE RET
EYES ONLY

onc


--- Page 24 ---
ce SECRET
EYES ONLY

-3-

a continuing basis and cannot be subjected to a stop-and-go treatment.
The DCI went on to say that any such activity is bound to be attributed
to the United States and if we are to carry through with it, we must
be prepared to accept the accompanying noise level. He said that a
sabotage program will not be entirely beneficial to U.S. interests;
on the minus side, there is the fact that this will complicate the
running of intelligence operations and it could result in Cuban
retaliation. Additionally, Mr. McCone said he is not in favor of
extreme types of sabotage such as complete destruction of crops,
contamination of water supplies, etc. He would prefer open inter-
vention to this kind of thing.

The DCI said that the combination of economic and other
pressures with sabotage activities, might provide a feasible climate
for a successful attempt to fragment the Castro organization. He
foresaw the possibility of such fragmentation leading to assumption
of power by a military dictatorship, which would probably be friendly
to the U.S. In this connection, Mr. FitzGerald said that we have
a line on certain high-ranking officers who are not. entirely sympa-
thetic to the regime. He pointed out, however, that a major opera-
tional obstacle to capitalizing on this situation is the difficulty
of persuading d&ndividual Cubans of this type to place their trust
in each other. In addition, we will have to be able to assure them
that the U.S. will be sympathetic to possible successors to the pre-
sent government, even though such people may have been former Castro
supporters. uo.

Mr. FitzGerald touched on the proposed support to selected Cuban
exile groups, for autonomous operations, as being one of the key points
of the possible new program. He made the point that there is no use
in the U.S. trying to deny that it backs such operations, since it
will be accused of this in any case, and the accusations will be
generally believed; further, such a posture is not detrimental to U.S.
interests. Mr. Bundy agreed with this point. He added, however,
that a "scenario" will have to be worked out, clearly indicating who
in.the government should respond to accusations in this field and
what in general they should say.

Mr. Bundy questioned a statement in the paper to the effect that
covert action which might be used as a pretext for overt military
intervention is ruled out. Mr. McCone and Mr. FitzGerald said that ,
the purpose of this statement was to indicate that the covert program
is not specifically directed toward the end of providing such a
pretext, but that it is not intended to preclude such a situation if
it should turn out to be desirable at some time in the future.

Mr. FitzGerald then described a number of possible sabotage
operations. In this connection, he pointed out that the paper con-
tains a proposal for the placing of limpets, carrying suitable delay
mechanisms, on the outside of Cuban ships so as to explode at sea.

GEeET EYES ONLY


--- Page 25 ---
13-00000

> VES ONLY )

-4-

He noted that Secretary Vance does not particularly like this pro-
position. because of the possibility that the explosions would be
attributed to torpedoes. While recognizing the validity of Mr.
Vance's argument, Mr. Gilpatric felt that this risk was acceptable.

The Chairman summed up the preliminary reactions of the Group to
the proposals as follows:

a. The proposition for dealing with selected exile groups
is a good one, but the method of dealing with them will have to be
more carefully defined.

b. There is no objection to limpets, subject to further
technical studies.

‘c. Surface attacks on Cuban ships do not appear particularly
. attractive, nor do shore-based attacks of a similar nature. i

d. Externally mounted hit-and-run attacks against land
targets appear worthwhile. The operations in this category which
can be run in May, will be discussed with higher authority. Refineries
2 and power plants seem to be particularly good targets. Operations
3 of this kind will be especially valuable if done in conjunction with
other resistance activities.

-e. Internal resistance should be stimulated, again in

conjunction with related operations.
ee

——_a ie
6. Covert Action, Congo

The CIA paper of 19 April was approved with little discussion.
The Chairman said that hés only concern was whether we are committed
to spending money at this rate forever. Mr. Tweedy said first that
if the Adoula government should fall, it would probably be in the
U.S. interest to support a successor government in a somewhat similar
way and, secondly, he pointed out that there are no firm commitments
made, although of course the recipients do come to expect a subsidy.

>
Or\

Mr. Bundy said he would mention this project to higher authority.

7. Final Status Report, Italian Election Project

Mr. McCone ran over the highlights of the prognostication for
the Italian elections, as summarized in the CIA paper of the 22nd of
April. He noted that virtually all the allocated money will have
been passed by this time. Mr. Bundy said that the CIA forecast is
3 generally consistent with reports he has had from Italian sources.

Law

a



--- Page 26 ---
13-00000

“3.

_ an inventory of operational assets.

British Guiana

Mr. McCone said that representatives of CIA and of MI-6 are
scheduled to meet on the 30th of April and the first of May. They
will consider: an up-to-date assessment of the situation; a proposed
British operational plan; alternative proposals if thispplan proves
not feasible; identification of Indians who might provide alternative
leadership to Jagan; the division of operational responsibility; and

The DCI said it is estimated that a continuation of the current
strike would require expenditures on the order of $10,000 a day.
The Group felt that if this could result in the defeat of Jagan, it
would: be well worth it. Accordingly, Mr. McCone undertook to look
into the situation immediately and to assure that support for the
strike is not cut off, pending a broader decision. He said he might
see James Fulton of MI-6, during his forthcoming trip to Europe, to

coordinate views. yh
UaPewth ae

Thomas A. Parrott

Distribution
Mr. Johnson
Mr. Gilpatric
Mr. McCone

CHET wd


--- Page 27 ---
13-00000

26 April 1963

MEMORANDUM FOR THE SPECIAL GROUP

SUBJECT: Proposed New Covert Policy and Programs Toward Cuba

As a follow-up to yesterday's Special Group discussion on the
proposed new covert policy and programs toward Cuba, the following
decisions have been made:

On Item 1. of the summary from the Coordinator of Cuban
Affairs, dated 19 April, additional planning and consultation is
approved. This will include further refinement of the Rules of
Engagement (in this connection, also see the minutes of yesterday's

- meeting); an assessment of the capabilities of specific groups;

and an estimate of the scale and scope of activities which selected
groups could carry out successfully.

Item 2.a. of the above-mentioned paper is approved. To
the extent possible, it is desired that the Special Group be in-
formed in advance of specific proposals under this heading... It is
recognized that this willin many cases not be feasible.

Item 2.b. is disapproved.

Further planning for individual elements of Item 2.c. is
approved, with the understanding that targets will be justified in
terms of their usefulness rather than with regard to the noise level
they might generate. Specific operations will be referred back
through normal channels (i.e., the Special Group in the first instance)
for final approval before execution.

, Item 2.d. is approved.

Thomas i Parrott

Distribution
Mr. Johnson
Mr. Gilpatric
_ Mr. McCone



--- Page 28 ---
missions (both contained in papers from the Coordinator of Cuban
Affairs dated 7 May).

There was no objection by the Group to any of the infiltration/
exfiltration operations. This approval includes the seven CIA
operations, the infiltration of a radio operator in support of the
U.S. Army, and approval of rendezvous opportunities which may arise
without adequate time to bring them to the Group. The Group also
noted Mr. Cheever.'s description of a proposed exfiltration to be
carried out by the MRR, with some support by CIA.

With regard to the two sabotage missions, Mr. Cheever said that
he thought the chances were excellent of carrying them out successfully.
He said, however, that the critical problem would arise the following
morning, when sea and air interception might well take place. He
emphasized that under the circumstances that could be expected in the
aftermath of such sabotage, the Cubans might well disregard any
territorial Limits in the course of hot pursuit of the saboteurs.
He added, in answer to questions, that there is no doubt that Cubans
would recognize these operations as being externally mounted, and
that. the agents would certainly talk if captured.

Mr. Cheever mentioned three possible operational plans which might
minimize the danger of capture by Castro forces, but emphasized that
these were by no means operationally well-designed nor was he re-
commending them, and further that they did not come within any exist-
ing policy approvals.

The feeling of the Group was that the damage that could be done
to the Cuban economy by successful execution of either of these
missions was not sufficient to outweigh the disadvantages. The Group
recognized that the responsible CIA operators feel themselves under
obligation to continue to develop suitable proposals, and they thought
that CIA should be encouraged to keep on doing this. The difficulty
of maintaining agent morale in the face of continued inaction was
recognized. Mr. Cheever was commended for his frank and explicit
outlining of the pros and cons,

4. Cuba -.NTS Broadcasts

Mr. McCone and Mr. Cheever said that CIA does not object to the
' Department of State's proposal to subsidize NTIS broadcasts from the
Dominican Republic, addressed to Soviet troops in Cuba. They pointed
out that this concurrence is subject to the caveats that the Agency
will be unable to accept responsibility for monitoring and control of

v



--- Page 29 ---
OP GRET :
EYES. ONE Y
-3-

the content of the broadcasts, and that contact with the NTS will
have to be made through its headquarters in Frankfurt, rather than
directly with the U.S. representative of the NTS. With these under-
standings, the Proposal . wWas_ approvers - rl ee :

5, "[folitical Action Bolivia

| The CIA paper of 3 April 1963 on the above subject was approved: ]! : :

60) (ase Proprietary, East Africa 96 1

| The CIA paper of 3 May 1963" on 1 the above e subject was as approved] |

ee -

7. Intelligence on Cuba s

Mr. McCone said that he is concerned about gaps in U.S. intelli-
gence on Cuba. He said that this leads him to favor resumption of
low-level reconnaissance. The other members of the Group felt that
under existing circumstances, this type of reconnaissance will not
meet the needs that Mr. McCone perceives. Mr. Johnson suggested
that penetrations of the Cuban Government would be more productive
in trying to assess Castro's possible intentions.

ht

Thomas A. Parrott

Distribution
Mr. Johnson |
Mr. Gilpatric
Mr. McCone

Yone


--- Page 30 ---
Y Galbraith, the Group noted. that the Indidns had refused, to grant

eb uiatasiatull at staid

9 May 1963

MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD
SUBJECT: Minutes of Meeting of the Special Group, 9 May 1963
PRESENT: Mr. Bundy, Mr. Johnson, Mr. Gilpatric, Mr. McCone
. Dr. Scoville was present for Items 1 and 2.
Captain Dankworth was present for Item l.

Mr. Cheever was present for Items 3 and 4.

. 98 - ee - . . . ~~

‘(Peripheral Reconnaissance

/.2 The Group approved operation YANKEE PASHA, which had been
originally presented at the meeting of 4 April and deferred at that
time, with the understanding that the aircraft would not approach - Mt
the Soviet coast closer than 15 miles.) om

2. 2. [Hesonnsissance of the Sino-India Border 98
With particular. reference to an incoming message from Ambassador

staging rights in India or to allow refueling over that .country. In {4

light of this, all “members of the Group felt that plans for these vot

missions shouldbe. shelved for the time being. Mr. McCone noted that

the “aircraft. now at Takhli will, ‘therefore, depart before the 7th (of
May, the date’ on which SEATO ‘exercises begin.

The: Group specified’ that in conveying he decision to the’
Indians it should be.madé perfectly clear that the standdown is due
to their own view of the urgency of such _coverage, not to any re-
Iuétance on our pare’

(The point was made that in the meeting of the CI Group, just
concluded, an allegedly improved road network south of Tchepone, in
Laos, had been mentioned. The CI.Group had felt that harder intelli-
gence should be obtained on this network. Dr. Scoville undertook to
make sure that this target is highlighted in planning for additional
highsper formance coverage of Lac aeons

3. Cuba - Proposed Agent Operations

Mr. Cheever outlined in some detail the infiltration/exfiltration
operations proposed for 15 May to 15 June, and the two possible sabotage

Tne


--- Page 31 ---
13-00000 ©

eet Soe le

cc

1963

o June

MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD

SUBJECT: Minutes of Meeting of the Special Group, 6 Jure 1963

PRESENT: Mr. Bundy, Mr. Jchnson, Mr. Cilpatric ({rems 1-7), and
Mr. McCone :
Colonel Steakley was present for-Items 1 and 2.
Mr. Lundahl was present for Irem 2.
Mr. George Miller was present for [tem 5.
Mr. FitzGerald was present for Item ?.
Mr. Karamessines was present for items 8 and 9,
Ll. (me Reconnaissance 946 a

poo With respect to the two PAYSTATION missions which were deferred

Me

“last week, the Group decided'that the L2-mile proposal should be

scrapped and that the 30-mile one should be flown for ELINT only]

78

[Reconnaissance of Cuba

a Mr. Lundahi showed the Group sample pictures from the two PEG
| LEG missions of 5 June. ;

Mr. McCone said that before making any recommendation as to
Further missions of this kind, he wished to have the USIB consider
the matter. In the meantime CIA and DIA are analyzing the results.

Mr. Lundahl and Colonel Steakley raised the question of the
advisability of including some color film in future missions. The
Group felt this kind of thing should be left to the best judgment of

the operators. J
98

3 (Far Bast Reconnaissance

Mr. McCone reported that two out of the existing four authoriza-
tions for high-performance reconnaissance of China have been exhausted.
It was agreed that’ the "bank" should be restored to the original four.

‘It was noted chat no further requirements now exist for this type
of reconnaissance of Laos, but there are some targets remaining in

North Vietnam]

t



--- Page 32 ---
13-00000. .

« - -

aissance of the Middle East 18

/ Mr. McCone reported that tit: British will probably not approve a
the request. to.use an-RAF base on Cyprus for high-performance

/ coverage oi Middle East areas, He said that the feasibility of \

! using Wheslus is being explored and that a new recomaencacion will

(be forthcoming to the Group. J . m1

f(ane Collection , G3

: Mr. Miller briefed the Group on ELINT projects OARAGE (Cuba) and :
: MOONBEAM (Japan). No objection was voiced to either proposal. ] “A

‘

6. Channels to Castro

The Group discussed various possibilities of establishing channels
of communication to Castro. All members of the Group agreed that this
is a useful endeavor. Mr. Bundy cautioned that of course Castro
snould not be made privy to any official U.S. positions, while Mr
McCone emphasized the necessity of kevping any such approach entirely
secret so far as the public is concerned, Lt was ‘agreed that pro-
posals of this kind which are particularly unusual, would be discussed
with the Special Group in advance. ;

7. Cuba Operations

. : . ~
_Mr. FitzGerald briefed the Group on the results of infiltration/
exfiltration operations during May, and on proposals for the coming
month. The latter were approved. . :

- ae + ye woe “

6. Gisate, ssncssnene 78

Assessment of Results of Election Operation

Mr. Karamessines discussed with the Group the results of the
* recent Parliamentary elections in Italy, and the effect of the
election project, so far as can be ascertained. He elaborated on

the CIA paper of 4 June.]
'fisauy, Proposed Aid to PSI Autonomists . A

Mr. Karamessines briefed the Group further on the preposal to
4 give aid to Nenni and his autonomist group of the PSI, as outlined in |
the CIA paper of 1 June .7 i

Yone


--- Page 33 ---
13-00000 .. -

-

nh, [ihe Group agreed to recoumend approval of this project to

“ \higher authority. Mr. Bundy will take this up on Monday, June 10th:
“He suggested that in the meantime all necessary preliminary alerting
be accomplished, so that Nenni can be informed in the even: of

‘| ‘favorable action, defore the meeting of the PSI Central Conmittee

/ on June Lethe]
Thomas t Parrott

Distribution
Mr. Johnson
Mr. Gilpatric
Mr. McCone


--- Page 34 ---
i
i

20 June 1963

MEMORANDUM. FOR RECORD
SUBJECT: Minutes of Meeting of the Special Group, 20 June 1963

PRESENT: Mr. Bundy, Mr. Gilpatric, Mr. McCone, and Mr. Hughes.
Colonel King was present for Item 3.
Mr. Colby was present for Item 4.
‘Mr. Critchfield was present for Item 6.

ee ERT fe ee a ee ms one Ce a a

eo te
1. [Reconnaissance of Southeast Asia

~v. “#" Mr. McCone reported that all high-performance inissions
scheduled for this area had been held up during the past week,”
due to bad weather.

2. Sabotage Program, Cuba

In connection with the new Cuba sabotage program approved
yesterday, Mr. McCone suggested that CIA make a report to the Special
Group every two weeks. The Group agreed. with this procedure. They
felt that such a report need not be in written form.nor very elaborate,
and that it should consist of a briefing on activities during the
preceding period and those planned for the next one. Mr. Bundy
commented that keeping the Group informed in this way constitutes
protection to the operators, since all agencies concerned are thereby
given a continuing feeling of just what is going on.

+ The CIA paper of 17 June was approved. Mr. McCone said he has
‘some reservations about the quality of any possible replacements for
Duvalier, but agreed that it is necessary to take some action in order
to prevent Haiti eventually going very far to the left. Colonel King,
in support of the paper's recommendations, said that in his opinion
we have no feasible alternatives but to cooperate with Bosch in.
attempting to‘unseat Duvalier, and that if this is not done we are
likely to end up with a far worse situation.

Mr. Hughes told the Group that the State Department shares the
reservation about the quality of alternatives, but it also recognizes
the necessity of taking some action. He said. the Department is
principally worried about the possibility that the U.S. hand in any
such operation might be revealed)

Upe


--- Page 35 ---
an eee ee etme nae neg ttle nit tt aero ne

~ - re
-2-

r

: Colonel. King’ cautioned that we:will not be in a position to

,; knowhow many useful exiles can be recruited until we give it a

| | try. “Mr. McCone and Colonel King said that probably the most pro-
mising way in which the desired objective can be obtained is :

eventually to accomplish “the defection of “significant cements of

_. the Army, the Palace Guard,” ece-]

Wyn i ee

4, Monthly ‘Report ‘on North Vietnam Operations

Mr. Colby gave a report on results of operations during the past
month, and those planned for the immediate future.

=~ The Group approved the State-CIA proposal to hold the Congo i
“paramilitary project, originally approved on 29 November 1962, in |

" ari
93 A
6. [iraq = Soviet Materiel Objectives and Related Problems ‘,

"~~ The Group approved the recomiendat ions contained in CIA's paper
f ‘of the 19th of. June.

if
Mr. McCone pointed out that this sort of action could conceivably

' lead into considerably broader activities, and emphasized - that the a

‘ | proposal immediately at hand is carefully limited. The Group agreed
that approval of these recommendations does not imply any sort of i
commitment to additional actions. ] i

‘Plans for Immediate Future GE

oo Mr. Bundy asked Mr. McCone to act as Chairman of the Special
Group next week, if he wishes to have a meeting. During the time
that the Presidential party is away, DOD peripheral flights, }

4 particularly in the European area, should be carefully screened.”/ ;

Sofas

Thomas A. Parrott

Distribution
Mr. Johnson
Mr. Gilpatric
Mr. McCone



--- Page 36 ---
that the U.S. government stands behind previously-expressed commit-
ments to ensure that India does not use its own. increased military
‘strength to mount an attack on Pakistan.

It was agreed that State and Defense should draft a paper for
higher authority, outlining this proposed approach to the Pakistan
government, with a CIA representative participating in the drafting
of the paper to the extent necessary to assure that the intelligence
interests and the views of the Special Group are adequately reflected.

ona

Thomas A, Parrott

Distribution
Mr. Johnson
Mr. Gilpatric
Mr. McCone

None


--- Page 37 ---
27 June 1963

MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD
SUBJECT: Minutes of Special Group Meeting, 27 June 1963
PRESENT: Mr. McCone, Mr. Johnson, and Mr. Gilpatric.

Colonel Steakley was present for Items 1-3.
Mr. FitzGerald was present for Item 5.

~ see mms NE see oF GY
1. -[Brtetsh Suggestion Regardi Reconnaissance Flights

The Group reviewed the message received from the British
Foreign Office through the British Embassy, suggesting that during
the period of the Harriman-Hailsham visit to Moscow reconnaissance
flights be suspended, as well as the suggested draft reply pre-
sented by Mr. Johnson. The Group approved the language of the
reply, the gist of which was that while appreciating the UK sug-
gestion, we do not find.it possible to agree to suspend all such
flights. We believe that most of them have virtually no risk, and
that to cancel all of them would break a routine long familiar to
the Soviets; we might then find it difficult to resume. However,
we undertake to screen with particular care all flights scheduled
during the period of this visit, so as to reduce selectively to a
minimum those which might be regarded by the Soviets as sensitive.

In the course of the discussion of these messages, the members
of the Group agreed that probably the British motive in making the
suggestion is to provide a political gesture that would be apparent
to. the Soviets. From this point of view, the pattern of DOD :

' peripheral flights was examined and the conclusions were that:

(a) Particularly sensitive flights are gcheduled sporadically.
Therefore, no isolated definite pattern in any one area that would
be noticed by the Soviets if cancelled and that would provide

political impact on Soviet leaders, can be identified. (b) A world-

wide stand-down during the. period of the visit could accomplish this
purpose, but would be undesirable for the reasons set forth in Mr.
Johnson's draft. .(c) Peripheral flights in particularly sensitive
areas (i.e., Baltic Sea, Black Sea and the Sea of Okhotsk) are
subject to Soviet reaction in the form of identification intercept

by fighters. However, it is believed that these have become sufficiently

routine so they are not brought to the attention of high levels of]

aa ” “See special minutes

for additional items.

‘S


--- Page 38 ---
13-00000

__ periphery will be subject to special review during this period. 7 - 4

2. ]:NRO Forecast GE "

the.Soviet government. (d) In the case of the Sea of Okhotsk,
fowever, no flights will be scheduled during the visit. Baltic
flights will be very carefully reviewed. Black Sea flights should ote
not require cancellation. In general, all flights around the Soviet

The NRO-monthly forecast for July was approved. ]
1

3./{Use of Chinese Pilots in Southeast Asia 7

"the NRO paper of 25 June, proposing the substitution of Chinese  j

Nationalist pilots for Americans for the high-performance coverage

' of North Vietnam and Laos, was discussed. in

Mr. Johnson said that the State Department's view is that if
Chinese Nationalist missions out of Taiwan are so scheduled as to i
cross over the border into North Vietnam from time to time, they have °.
no real objection (on the understanding that the cover story would 4
be that the pilot had strayed off course.) On the other hand, the i
Department is unable to concur in any deep penetration into the
southern part of North Vietnam, or into Laos, The latter country is
considered particularly sensitive in this respect.

In. light of the State position, the Group agreed to proceed as

- at present with the modifications suggested by Mr. Johnson.7

4. fSoain - Labor Program 96
_ The CIA. paper of 21° June was approved as _presented.]

5. Cuba - Infiltration/Exfiltration Operations

Mr. FitzGerald briefed the Group on the results of the previous
month's operations.

Mr. McCone called particular attention to the continuing buildup
of fast patrol boats in the Cuban inventory, and said that in light
of this we must begin to draw contingency plans for alternate methods
of delivery of agents and supplies against the eventuality that the
patrol boats may become too great a hazard. He suggested the possi-
bility of such means of delivery as submarines.



--- Page 39 ---
13-00000

Mr. McCone went on to say that continuing reports are now being
received, alleging the existence of various exotic items of materiel
in Cuba. No one report appears to stand up, but he has directed
that all such reports for the past ninety days be examined in total
context, so as to see whether on this basis any possible pattern
might emerge. Mr. McCone added that he personally feels very uneasy
about the situation in Cuba.

Me? anait

Thomas A. Parrott

Distribution
Mr. Johnson
Mr. Gilpatric
Mr. McCone



--- Page 40 ---
o fy? 7 .. : cy Cee a

11 July 1963

MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD

SUBJECT: Minutes of Special Group Meeting, 11 July 1963

PRESENT: Mr. McGeorge Bundy, Mr. Johnson, *orxttkbpetoinjoand
Mr. William Bundy and Mr. McCone

Colonel Steakley was present for Item 1.
Mr. R. Jack Smith was present. for Item 2.
Mr. FitzGerald was present for Items 2 and 3.

: Mr. Colby was present for Items 4 and 5.
lL. |Gecspnesat Reconnaissance 76 —
4

poe The Croup approved the agreement reached last week between

a State and the JRC on the handling of certain possibly sensitive

‘} operations during July. Specifically, REX 1 and 2 were approved
with the understanding that the nearest point to the Kuriles would ©

be 15 miles. instead of 14, at the northern end of the track. URBAN

f
| and RAY were approved, in light of the fact that overt flight plans |
will be filed.

\
It was noted that the Chiefs had already deferred operations

\ YANKEE PASHA, VERNE. and THOMAS at least until after completion of
the Harriman ‘mission.

|
|
if
: of the three new missions presented by JRC, RED DOG /HAWKEYE and
Hi the special photographic operation in European Turkey were approved

| aS presented, Mission RAINHAT-Track 2 was approved with the stipula-

It
_tion that the nearest point to the target country will be 12 miles :
rather than 10,

The British note concerning proposed reconnaissance of the . |

‘Soviet Northern Fleet (British name, Operation BARGOLD) was discussed.

: ‘| Colonel Steakley stated that the standard British restrictions on such \
: . .. operations are that no aircraft will approach closer than a quarter of I
i - a mile or will go under 500 feet, but he said that we have been'unable a
f .. to determine whether the current restrictions, mentioned in the :
.. British note, are more stringent than this. He told the Group that I

‘' U.S. rules provide for no harassing action and for no flights below a
: 2000 feet (this height limit being primarily because of flight safety, iM
pO [| in view of the expected presence of British aircraft at a lower level). |
: The Group felt there is. no objection to overflying Soviet vesséls
4

under these conditions, despite the apparent British ban on this for
‘their own aircraft]



--- Page 41 ---
9g
a State will inform the British Minister that we Propose to pro- "
“ceed in this manner] 4,

2. “Cuba - “Status” of Sov et . Personnel and Materiel

Mr. McCone reminded the Group that he had asked for a review of
intelligence reports on the situation inside Cuba over a 90-day
period, so as to see whether any possible pattern might emerge. He
said this review is just now being completed, it having involved
examination of 30,000 to 40,000 separate reports. He expects a draft
to be available to him by Monday or Tuesday. This will. probably take
the form of an Agency memorandum, but DIA will be asked to review it.

The Chairman said that the Cuban situation will be of great
importance in connection with Governor Harriman's negotiations;
accordingly, he asked that an informal reading on the results of
this review be made available as soon as possible, before a formal .
paper is fully completed.

Mr. Smith then. summarized CIA's latest views on the status of
Soviet personnel and equipment. He said that there is insufficient
evidence on which to base any change in the current estimate of
12,000 to 13,000 Soviet troops. He said that it appears the Soviets |
are now engaged in training Cubans for eventual transfer of Soviet
‘equipment to them. No combat equipment has been seen leaving Cuba,
since last fall.

Mr. Smith added that the equipment which was seen leaving on
6 July appears on close examination by photo interpreters to be
communications and generator vans, rather than missile guidance
equipment.

-Mr. McCone said that the [Japanese] Ambassador to Cuba has ex-
pressed his conviction that some offensive Soviet missiles still
remain in Cuba. CIA and State will debrief. the Ambassador on this
point today. :

3. Cuba _- Agent Operations

Mr. FitzGerald told the Group about two additional infiltration/
exfiltration operations which were carried out in the last days of
June, after his last report. He then mentioned highlights of proposals
for the next month, These proposals, as presented in the Coordinator's
paper of 9 July, were approved.


--- Page 42 ---
-3-

Mr. McGeorge Bundy said that by the 26th of July the Harriman
negotiations in Moscow might have reached a crucial stage; he asked
how flexible are the sabotage operations planned for that day (as
explained by Mr. FitzGerald to the Standing Group on Tuesday). He
said he was not suggesting that any change in the basic guidance for
sabotage operations is indicated, but it is evident that in times
of particular sensitivity all potential ly provocative activities
should be subject to review.

In this connection, Mr. FitzGerald said that because of light
factors these operations could not be run any later than July 28th,
in this month's moon period. He pointed out that if it should appear
that it would be advisable for political reasons to postpone the
operations until the August dark-of-the-moon period, then as much
advance notice as possible should be given the agents,:iin order not
to damage their morale unduly. It was agreed that by. the time of
next week's Special Group meeting it should be possible to make some
kind of judgment about the possible progress of the Harriman talks, _
and that a decision could be made at that time whether or not to
postpone these particular operations.

4. Vietnam - Monthly Status Report

Mr. Colby outlined the results of the past month's agent operations.

In summary, he said that he believes the covert propaganda activities
are beginning to catch on, but that so far there is not a great deal
of tangible result to report in the sabotage field.

5. | mibee ~ Status Report GE

Mr. Colby expanded briefly on the paper of the 8th of ‘July, on
the status of projected Tibetan agent operations. He emphasized that
the trainees will be sent back to India in the very near future, and
that discussions will then take place jointly with the Indians as to
details of overland infiltration into Tibet. Planning for air drops
of agents is being deferred until sufficient operational intelligence
can be built up to permit reasonable decisions.“} —_

(& Suatenalas Govert Annex (Revised) to Internal Defense Plan

This annex was noted by the Group. Particular attention was
called to the agreed assessment that the Arevalo threat no longer exist

)

Thomas A. Parrott
Distribution
Mr. Johnson
Mr. Gilpatric
Mr. McCone

e\

‘s:])



--- Page 43 ---
13-0000 GRR Re nn ee and

. Pweg ect nee Te
‘ wo : ake

a

18 July 1963

_ MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD
SUBJECT: Minutes of Special Group Meeting, 18 July 1963
PRESENT: Mr. Bundy, Mr. Johnson, Mr. Gilpatric, and Mr. McCone

Colonel King was present. for Item 2.
Mr. FitzGerald was present for Item 3.
Mr. Sheldon was present for Item 4.

1, [feciinategunce BO

. Mr. McCone reported that during the last week no high-performance
- missions were flown in the Far East, due to bad weather. ]

2. [mates - Political Action G6 , 4

Mr. McCone and Colonel King reported that the following changes

: ‘have taken place in the Haitian picture since the Special Group ‘7

| approved, on June 20th, the proposal to reach a covert understanding i

with President Bosch on the use of Haitian exiles in the Dominican
Republic. The developments are:

a. It has been demonstrated that these. exiles are of
very little use, because of insecurity, lack of cohesive purpose or
of adequate leadership, etc.

a b. President Bosch has now decided that he is unwilling |
‘sto allow such an exile force to use his country as a base fornmilitary :
' .operations against Duvalier. ,

Cc. Duvalier's own capabilities have improved greatly, due
to such things as: the widespread purge of potentially-dissident Army
officers; clearance of the border areas; and, most recently, the 7
elimination of the Barbot brothers. . j

.. © ~ Colonel King said that everyone concerned with the project

": agrees that Duvalier must be removed in some manner or other. However,/:
in light of the factors mentioned above, operating elements have con-
cluded that the existing plan is unworkable, and that it is best to
switch to a different kind of operation. This would include in the in
first instance, training of selected exiles in intelligence collection,
in communications, and in cross-border operations. Such training 7 ‘iy



--- Page 44 ---
Pambeants 2AM

13-00000) tissue

‘ Bae, won . .

i : “ ayn os

. 7 toe. OS

ce Sabai
x

-2-
48

. feould be given at a base in the Continental U.S. or in Puerto Rico; .
“Support and facilities may be required from DOD. The long-range oF
' = objectives would be to establish a clandestine organization capable
“ | of gathering intelligence and eventually building up and arming an
|; effective opposition in Haiti; to establish friendly relations with,
. | and if necessary, support individuals capable of playing a constructive
role in a future Haitian government; to encourage and support indi-
viduals and organizations who are both anti-Duvalier and anti- ~Communist ;

and to attempt to spread dissension among Duvalier advisers and to
subvert some of them.

Colonel King emphasized that the $200,000 already approved would
cover the training activities, but that it is impossible to estimate
now how much the subversion operations might require, if suitable
opportunities should be identified.

. .,
The Group agreed to recommend this new course of action to higher
authority. : .

(There was no objection by higher authority to the program as
’. presented, in the light. of the changed conditions)’
3. Cuba - Sabotage Operations

7 bee we cee ne

Mr.. FitzGerald was asked to reschedule tentatively for the
middle of August the special operations planned for the 26th of July,
in light of the negotiations going on in Moscow. Mr. Bundy cautioned
that it is entirely possible that by the middle of August the negoti-
ating. process might have gone into another phase which would make it
necessary to cancel the operation ¢ once more.

! The Group considered the CIA paper of 17 July, with attachments,

i! which outlined the difficulties which have been encountered recently

| in getting the Pakistani government to go along with expansion of our

{ special intelligence facilities in that country. Mr. McCone emphasized

his feeling and that of the USIB as a whole, that any wasting of this /
: asset would represent a very serious-loss to’ the intelligence community. ©

ia After some discussion the Group agreed that the best method of
‘approach is to make it entirely clear in presenting the proposed three- ;

' year MAP program to Pakistan authorities that the maintenance and {

. ..: expansion of U.S. intelligence facilities at Peshawar is an essential '
part of the bargain. It can also be reaffirmed to Ayub at that time)

faa

Le


--- Page 45 ---
15 August 1963

MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD
SUBJECT: Minutes of Meeting of the Special Group, 15 August 1963
PRESENT: Mr. Bundy, Mr. Johnson, Mr. Gilpatric, and Mr, McCone.

Mr. FitzGerald and Mr. Cheever were present for Items 1,
2 and 5.C.

Dr. Whelan, Colonel Ledford, and Mr. Cunningham were present
for Items 3 and 4.

1. ‘A Non-Violent Program to Inhibit Free World and Neutral Tzade
with Cuba

The operational proposal dated 12 August, was approved by the
Special Group, with the two changes in wording made by the State
Department. Mr. FitzGerald pointed out that to make this operation
convincing, a "big bang" on a Cuban ship will be carried out before
the operation is implemented. He further pointed out that in paragraph
2.a. of the paper, the reference to "real ... sabotage" applied to
Cuban shipping only. Item 2.c. in the operational proposal was thought
to be of low priority and is to be placed at the bottom of the List.

2. Cuba - Support of Autonomous Anti-Castro Groups

Mr. FitzGerald recommended that the paper dated 13 August be
submitted at this time for discussion only rather than decision by the
Special Group. This recommendation was made because the members of
the Group had not been given sufficient time to study the proposal.
The paper had been presented in hasty fashion because CIA had received
reports that the exile group in question was beginning to scatter and
prepare for an operational program not influenced by CIA.

There was some discussion of the effects of using a British
island for launching these operations and as to the desirability of
striking Cuban shipping on the high seas. Decision on this operation
was deferred until the next meeting.

OO
See_ special minutes
for additional items

EY
::

“nap
ag
\

7
Jad



--- Page 46 ---
13-00090... . .

3.7 [Begensive Armament for GROSBEAK Aircraft

The Special Group approved the paper of 11 August as presented,
subject to confirmation that the sidewinder heat-seeker missile, already
compromised, would not lead to a security problem should a GROSBEAK

‘, plane be lost.

',

4... [cxospeax Overflight of Laos G3 I.
be t

The proposal was approved to overfly Laos in order to fulfill i
i
t

! COMOR requirements for radar order of battle information in support
: of current and future missions."]

5. [Miscetianeous Items . Gg g

a A. Mr. McCone briefly described the current status of Radio 4
' Free Europe (RFE) and Radio Liberty (RadLib). He stated that he hoped :
there would be no change in the State Department policy with respect to f
. the radios because of the extensive commitments, international agree- i
' ments, and political implications in RFE and RadLib. Mr. McCone 7
| indicated that there appeared to be a feeling in some quarters of the
| Department of State. that, because the U,S. may be entering a period of }
| "detente" with the Soviet Union, efforts should be made to reduce the j
' causes of tension and conflict, Since the two radios are major :
' iyritants to the Soviets, CIA should, therefore, modify or reduce . i
! some of these activities. The Special Group opined that this was not :
the time to change U.S. policy with respect to RFE and RadLib, Mr, .
Johnson said he would look into this further, —

" B. The matter of the Soviet attempt to establish a consolidated
: headquarters at Lietzenburger Strasse in West Berlin, was raised by
‘Mr. McCone. He opposed such a development forthe following reasons: \

' (1) The formation of such a headquarters would lay the
groundwork for future Soviet claims to an equal footing with the
U.S, in West Berlin. :

(2) Its establishment would severely handicap CIA operations
against the USSR target in West Berlin.

(3) Such a center would improve on the USSR's ability to
concentrate its operations against Western targets. a

(4) It would in effect increase Soviet prestige in West / ,

- a i Berlin. 7]

Sg IEE TER onmmme RETHE GENRN RSs core stteentintromote a RET Be qeentene oi a ce Sgiiaweesende BAR EET OT Ty hath TEL fag cena ead Ge get



--- Page 47 ---
13-00000-

(itr. Bundy stated he was aware of the problem and believed that 4
the British who had been reluctant to support. the position of the
U.S. and the French, now concurred that a refusal to the Soviets . \
should be made. This concerted action, it was believed by the Group,
would succeed in preventing the Soviets from establishing such a

consolidated headquarters.

C, Mr. FitzGerald reported that recent discussions held with ;
Artime have indicated that he is somewhat disgusted with Luis Somoza
who has not behaved sensibly, but that he does have respect for his .
brother, General Anastasio Somoza, with whom he can deal more rationally. -
Artime will make greater use of Costa Rica in order to decrease his
operational commitments in Nicaragua and increase his | security .") ;

he Hid

Distribution
Mr. Johnson
Mr. Gilpatric
Mr. McCone



--- Page 48 ---
TTT Sareaci a Neaee cere weeetenneateme

8 August 1963

MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD
SUBJECT: Minutes of Special Group Meeting, 8 August 1963
PRESENT: Mr. Bundy, Mr. Johnson, Mr. Gilpatric, and General Carter

Mr. FitzGerald was present for Item 1.
Mr. Herbert was present for Item 2.
Mr. Baird’ was present for Item 3.

1. Cuba - Infiltration/Exfiltration Operations

Of the 13 Cuban operations approved by the Special Group, 2 are.to be
externally-mounted sabotage operations which will be subject to
possible reconsideration up.to 12 August 1963. The other 11 operations
approved are designed to meet the need for expanded intelligence

‘collection activities and to develop viable internal resistance

organizations. :

‘Mr. FitzGerald made a special report o.. Luis Somoza's conversa-
tions with exile leaders. Somoza wants the Cuban exiles to begin

' aggressive harassment operations against Castro and indicated that

the Nicaraguan government was willing to give them a base as well as
support, including military aid. Somoza intimated that this may result
in Castro's launching an offensive against Nicarague. If this occurs,
Somoza would expect U.S. protection and possibly intervention. Mr.
FitzGerald further stated that Manuel Artime, leader of the Movement
for Revolutionary Recovery, would be in the U.S., at which time all
aspects of his program would be examined. In.order to avoid unfavor-
able complications. with Somoza, two operational changes will be
suggested:

a.  Artime should concentrate on getting resistance started
inside Cuba and de-emphasize armed attack and external sabotage.

b. Artime should shift the main weight of his operations to
Costa Rica. There should be no break, of course, between Artime
and Somoza. ;

In. this connection Mr. Johnson raised the Costa Rican Foreign
Minister's question regarding Artime, It was agreed that Mr. FitzGerald
would work out the language of the reply with Mr. Cottrell, giving as

See special minutes
for additional items



--- Page 49 ---
i

‘t

much encouragement to Costa Rica's support of Artime as possible
without showing his activities.

General Carter mentioned the eagerness of William D. Pawley to
implement an operational plan against Cuba, purportedly designed to
create a situation which might ultimately require U.S. intervention.
The consensus of the Special Group was that an independent operation
organized by Pawley, would not ‘be desirable. Efforts should be made
to bring him into CIA's current operational thinking.

Mr. FitzGerald also reported that the Attorney General had sent
Mr. Harry Ruiz Williams to the Agency to present a plan which turned
out to.be a series of 4.2 mortar attacks on the Cuban coast mounted
from Guatemala. It was agreed that such attacks, in addition to being
impractical logistically, would also tend to give substance to the
“Somoza plan" and therefore should be discouraged.

2. [Bolivia - Covert Action” ~ GFE Cee
’ ' The CIA paper of 2 August was approved. ]

3. [aa Training Activities GE

Mr. Matthew Baird, Director of CIA's Training Activities, made
an oral report on CIA's counterinsurgency training and courses. Mr.
Baird emphasized that ever since the establishment of the Office of
Training in January 1951, CIA has concentrated on the covert aspects
of training. It has not duplicated in any way courses offered by the
Department of Defense, the Foreign Service Institute or universities.
During fiscal 1963, CIA sent over 2000 students to 1275 courses at 166
government and educational institutions. In addition, during the same
year, CIA trained 4214 students in 432 runnings of 64 different courses,
all directly or indirectly relating to counterinsurgency. :

Mr. Baird said that strong emphasis has always been placed on }
resistance operations and guerrilla and paramilitary activities. The
methodof instruction in CIA is based on case studies of current
operations. CIA trained, during fiscal 1963, 150 junior officers (with
a drop out of less than four per cent) and gave instruction to 174
foreign personnel in counterinsurgency, or directly related fields.

Mr. Bundy raised the question as to how CIA courses were inspected.

' General Carter replied by pointing out that these courses are con- 7

tinuously inspected by the Inspector General, the President's Board of
Consultants, and the Deputy Director, Plans, who heads up the clandestine

services.



--- Page 50 ---
13-00000

a

a

The consensus was that Central Intelligence was meeting its

counterinsurgency training obligations and that because of the covert ,

character of the training, an inspection team external to CIA was
probably not desirable. / : _. .

Hee Shik

Paul Eckel

Distribution
‘Mr. Johnson
Mr. Gilpatric
General Carter



--- Page 51 ---
29 August 1963

MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD

SUBJECT: Minutes of Meeting of the Special Group, 29 August 1963

PRESENT::.. Mr. Bundy, Mr. Johnson, Mr. Gilpatric, and General Carter

Colonel Steakley was present for Items 1’and 2.
Mr. Cheever was present for Item 3._
1. [tonenty Reconnaissance Forecasts 98
a. NRO
ee The NRO forecast for September. was approved as presented,
with one exception. This had to do with the second Laos/North Vietnam.
flight, which had been requested in order to "replenish the bank."
Mr. Johnson asked that he be briefed on the results of previous

reconnaissance in this area so that he could weigh the value of the
product against the political risk involved.

It was noted that this procedure will not delay operations,
since one approval remains outstanding for Laos/North Vietnam.

b. DOD

.: The DOD September forecast was approved with the exception
of the proposed trip of the USS THOMASON. Mr. Johnson objected to
the proposal to transit the Kita Uruppu Suida Passage. He said that
the Department. is in. favor. of continuing to exercise our rights of
free navigation in the Sea of Okhotsk; but the projected voyage of
the hydrographic ship REHOBOTH satisfies this requirement. Further,
U.S. merchant shipping does transit the Passage. In view of these
considerations, he did not believe it desirable at this time to send .
a U.S. warship on this route. The Group concurred with Mr. Johnson's

position.

General Carter said that in view of certain other indications
‘recently received, YANKEE PASHA is considered by the intelligence
community to be even more urgent than before.

' Mr. Johnson raised a question about the mission of the USS
STATEN ISLAND in the Chukchi Sea, asking whether the objective could
not be met by staying 15 miles from shore rather than 12. Colonel’)



--- Page 52 ---
+

(Steakley explained that the mission of the ship is to obtain informa-
tion on hydrographic "stations" located 12 miles out and that the
restriction suggested would not enable the vessel to accomplish this.
Mr. Johnson then concurred.

Colonel Steakley. briefed the Group on certain sensitive
reconnaissance operations.

Colonel Steakley gave a brief summary of the deployment of
MIG fighters in the China coastal areas. He said that as of now there
are no MIG-21's in the area, the MIG complement consisting of 17's
and 19's. He saw no need to revise any of the projected BOW TIE
. missions because of these fighters.’]

2. [Begotiations for Indian Base GF ao

The Group noted the report from New Delhi that the Indian

| Intelligence Service finds itself unable to give assurances to the
' Prime Minister about the security of personnel on the projected ,
: temporary base at Char Batia, and that approval for use of this base
» has, therefore, been withheld.

Mr. Gilpatric and General Carter pointed out that the DIA is
anxious to have the Sino-Indian border area covered, because this has a
not been done since January. General Carter said that he had intended [
to have the USIB reassess the priority of this requirement at its ‘
meeting yesterday, but that other matters had made it impossible to
bring it up.

ma

Y The Group felt that this should be discussed with USIB next week.

’ They agreed, however, that in the absence of a really persuasive case
for the priority of the requirement, it would be inadvisable to attempt
to run the operation once more out of Takhli without Indian assistance.
They felt that other things being equal, it would be preferable to
revert to the original proposal of having a permanent Indian base
available in December -")

3. Cuba

a. The Group then turned to consideration of the paper from
the Coordinator of Cuban Affairs dated 12 August 1963, "Support of
Autonomous Anti-Castro Groups." In answer to questions, Mr. Cheever
said that the project for support of Commandos L would be useful but
not essential, He felt that the economic damage which this group might
inflict would probably be comparatively minor. On the other hand there
would be some psychological advantages to be gained, and also such
operations would serve to keep the Cuban security forces busy.



--- Page 53 ---
In view of the personal interest expressed by Mr. McCone ©
in the project when it was tabled at the meeting of 15 August, it was
agreed that no decision should be made until after the DCI's return.

b. Mr. Cheever briefed the Group on the successful disposal of
the contaminated sugar which has been in Puerto Rico.

c. Mr. Cheever discussed the "After Action Report" on the two
sabotage operations conducted the middle of August. Mr. Johnson
commented on the amount of materiel that had been left behind at the
site of one of these operations, and asked whether it is possible that
the Cuban agents did this deliberately, in order to involve the United
States. Mr. Cheever acknowledged this possibility, but felt that it
had simply been a question of “green troops" behaving in this manner

their first time under fire.

The Chairman asked that an estimate be prepared, assessing
Castro's probable reaction to this sabotage. He also asked Mr. Cheever
to see that the Attorney General is briefed on the results of the’
operations. _ 9g . ee

4. ((Gesta Rica - Re-establishnent of Institute for Political Education

The CIA paper of 26 August was approved as presented. 7

(GRosBEAK Armament GE .
yo, oe h make it clear
.o0 the Chinese
GROSBEAK aircraft
verification that
al can, therefore, ]

heh andl

omas A. Parrott

Distribution
Mr. Johnson
Mr. Gilpatric
General Carter



--- Page 54 ---
oN

a : EYES GN] 1Y a

5 September 1963

MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD
SUBJECT: Minutes of. Special Group Meeting, 5 September 1963
PRESENT: Mr. Bundy, Mr. Johnson, Mr. Gilpatric, and Mr. McCone.

Mr. FitzGerald was present for Items 1 and 2.
Mr. Colby was present for Items 3-5.

1. Cuba - Agent Operations

Mr. FitzGerald commented on several reports from inside Cuba,
which indicate that the morale of the people was raised considerably
- as a result of the Santa Lucia and Casilda sabotage operations. He
. cautioned that some of these reports might be somewhat overdrawn,
but it appears certain that the sabotage did have a beneficial effect
in this way.

He then discussed with the Group the general philosophy of these
operations, and plans for the future within the capabilities of the —
available agents.. Among other things, he pointed out that there is
a limited number of targets on or near the coast and that the most
attractive ones are, at the same time, the most difficult to attack;
the available teams are not yet ready for assignments of this difficulty
’ On the other hand, smaller and more vulnerable targets are being: selected.
Te is proposed to hit a lumber mill ‘in September.

Mr. FitzGerald went on to say, in connection with the. scope and
pace of these operations, that it would not be desirable to knock out
all available targets in the near future, even if it were possible
to do so. This is because this type of attack is designed to stimulate
.vesistance inside Cuba, apart from whatever intrinsic value it might

The Group agreed with the approach, They felt that the reaction
to the two missions in August was most satisfactory and that it is ;
essential to keep this sort of thing up, selecting a limited number of

_ worthwhile targets. Mr. Bundy commented particularly on the silence

that had been maintained by the agents, which has resulted in the
noise level being of a different character than might have been ex-~
_ pected otherwise. Mr. FitzGerald was authorized to proceed with a
relatively soft target, such as a lumber mill. ,

See special minutes
for additional items

SECRET
EYES ONLY.



--- Page 55 ---
There were some questions as to the feasibility of having some-
what larger teams, but Mr. FitzGerald pointed out that that is not
practicable now. Mr. Bundy suggested that special attention be given
to electric power installations to the extent that adequate assets
are available for that purpose.’ He also noted that the two August
operations had been carried out in a professional and sophisticated
manner, which leads naturally to the accusation of Agency sponsorship.
He urged that to the extent possible attempts be made to vary the ;
method, for example by launching the attack from the shore side rather
than from the sea, as Mr. FitzGerald had previously said will be the
case with the lumber mill. Mr. Bundy felt that in this way the "CIA
signature" might be blurred.

The Group then discussed the paper prepared by the Board of

" National Estimates, on possible Castro reaction to sabotage opera-

tions.. No issue was taken with the conclusions of this paper, but
there was some discussion as to how the Soviets would react to any
requests made of them by Castro to assist him in combatting sabotage.
In this connection, Mr. McCone called attention to the increasing
currents of tension between the USSR and Cuba.

- Mr.-FitzGerald then summarised the results of last month's
infiltration/exfiltration operations and those proposed for next
month, — :

‘2. Cuba ~ Support of Autonomous Anti-Castro Group

The Group then turned to further discussion of the paper from
the. ‘Coordinator of Cuban Affairs dated August 13, on the subject of |
Comandos Be

In response to objections stated at earlier meetings to the use
of a British base, Mr. FitzGerald said that it would be feasible to
take off from a point in the northern Bahamas, rather than from one of
the keys very near Cuba. This would considerably reduce the dangers
of hot pursuit.

. Mr, Johnson said thet purely apart from the British problem,
whether or not such a change in location would alleviate it, he does
not feel that the type of activity proposed accomplishes the agreed
objective of reaching internal resistance elements.

The Chairman, Mr. Gilpatric, and Mr. McCone all felt that support
of this group in the manner outlined, should be considered as action
additional to that designed to contact the resistance. Further, they
felt that it would be perfectly feasible, and in fact necessary, to
avoid any involvement with the British in this matter. It was finally



--- Page 56 ---
SECRET
EYES GRLY

-3-

_decided that Mr. Bundy would discuss the proposal with higher authority,
noting the reservations expressed by Mr. Johnson. In the event of
favorable reaction by higher authority, Mr. Bundy will talk further to
Mr. Johnson.

: Mr. McCone said that he would like to see more activity of this
general nature and asked whether this could be accomplished if larger
‘numbers of Cuban personnel were obtained. Mr. FitzGerald replied that
the problem is not numbers, but the degree of training and competence.
In this connection, he noted that the Artime group should be ready t to
go in November. . ee ee es -

3. 3. | nteraictton op rations Alo - Route 7

'. diction of Route 7 in Laos by a thousand-man force of Meos, in early
August. He pointed out that the success achieved could be attributed
to adequate -operational intelligence, security, size of the group, and

4. [forth Vietnam Status Report Number 7

Oe eg colby touched on the highlights of agent activity in North
Vietnam during August, ’ and on plans for simf lar activity during the
. coming month, 7

‘5. { Qperations in Denied Areas of the Far East 98

as Mr. Colby said that-a review has been made of experience with

:. agent operations in the denied areas of the Far East, including North

: Korea, China, Tibet and North Vietnam. He said that as a result of :
this review, serious doubts have arisen as to the results that can be n .

expected’ from’ small teams, either in intelligence or in action, He -=—
said that he proposes to discuss with the DCL in the near future, 4

i: certain changes in the method of operation in such areas. This might !
' take the form of concentrating on developing a spirit of resistance

rather than on a search for resistance elements or on carrying out

minor sabotage. It might also involve much larger groups of people.

In this connection, he pointed to the success (of the thousand-man

operation against Route 7)

Mr. Colby briefed the Group in detail on the successful inter- \

7 the support of the Parus.] . i

Sra tap ececorinscianei age a one ocean roe rE

Yon


--- Page 57 ---
on

_ a Mr. Gilpatric noted that the Wheeler report, recommending the ¥
f,. 0 F “use of South Vietnamese nationals for activities of this nature in i
_ ' North Vietnam, is to be discussed next week with the Joint Chiefs. ‘i

i

| Mr, McCone’ ipsa that. the 2 Chiefs: should be. briefed by Mr. Colby. 7

wea

Thomas A. Parrott

Distribution
Mr. Johnson
Mr. Gilpatric
Mr. McCone



--- Page 58 ---
i 7 i 7 5 Ke
SECRET. a eal
EYES ONLY i
24 October 1963
pet

MEORANDUM FOR RECORD
SUBJECT: Minutes of Meeting of the Spectal Group, 24 October 1963
PEESEMT: Mr. Bundy, Mr. Johnson, Mr. Gilpatrie, and Mr. McCone

Mr. Helas was also praesent. :
Mr. FitsGerald and Mr. Cheever were present for Items 205.

Nk mat . a wee ae G6 .
1. [Poste States Evaluation Board (USEB)

"me, Holes reported that the USEB wes established in 1950 by «
Metional Security Council Intelligence Directive. The Board waa re-
quired to perfora certain functions in connection with U.S. cover

and deception programs. Meabership on the Board wae limited to the
Service ‘Departments, Pai, cla, XS, and the Departmene of State.

According to Mr. Helms the USEB has not met in recent years.
However, it wes agreed by the Special Group that its functions had

' considerable significance end should be continued. Since USEB was

originally organised only to deal in the military sphere, it was re-
commended by Mr. Helms chat a new directive be written and coordinated, |

which would encoepase all national decapcion progreas, and be sub- “ft ‘
$ <a

that the oew homd would Eaport to the e Spectal Groupe

mitted to che Speciel Group for epproval. It was also deternined | \

2. : at of CIA Sabots rat ior uo etal 37

The proposed sabotage operations for November through January
was noted by the Group. The operation plan against petroleum storage
facilities in Niquero was deleted and an operation ageiast s savnill
located et Canate in Morthern Oriente Province, was substituted. Specific
operational propos@le for Noveaber will be eubmitced to the Special Group

_ for approval at the next mecting.

3. Guba + Proposel for Air Strikes Ageinst Cuban Targets

This operational proposal was deferred by the Special Group
ponding anu estizate to determine the Cuban reaction to an air strike
oa the Santiago refinery, and specifically whet effect it might have
on the U.8. reconnaissance operation. CIA will prepare che estimate.

See ial minu
for additional ites



--- Page 59 ---
‘SHORT 8

EYES ONLY,
4 2 lo 3 a for 8 rt oO
Autonomous AnticCastro Groups ;

Mx. FitsCerald informed the Group that CIA is dropping ite
earlier proposal to support Cowandos L, due to the crackdown on
exile raids by various U. &. and British governsent agencies. He
recommended that a plan of “selective relaxation” ba adopted, designed
to relax current stringent controls on selected anti-Castro groups in
order to evoid all raide being charged to CIA,

_ The suggestion is that the “selective relaxation” be accoaplished
by authorizing CIA to tell appropriate U.S, enforcement agente that
eertein activities are of interest to CIA and should not be molested.

‘CIA would not actually get involved but would simply screen cheese

groups to permit some freedoa of movement on the part of the better
ones. Thies would be without the knowledge of the groups.

Mr. Johnson raised the question of difficulties of controlliag

exile groups should eny group succeed in engaging in activities not

te the Liking of the U.S. Governsent. This possibility was admitted,

Mc. FitsGereld cited the Hanolo Bay group sa one group which a
“selective relexation" would assist. Thia autonancus group is re-
ceiving financial and limited logistic assistance frou CIA, and desires
te apunt an infiltration operation from Florida. He has goed cons
peetions in Cube and should be urged to proceed. Mr. Bundy stated he
was not enthusiastic about Ray operating from U.S. territory. Mr.
Bundy steted he would discuse thie propesesi with higher authority.

5. Guba ~ Infileration Operation

Me, FitsGexald reported chat one of the euall boats used in the
21 October infiltrstion operation reached Mexico and is in the hends —
of local authorities, friendly to us;. There were threé persons on
beard, ona dead, one injured, and the other all right. ,

The fate of the second small boat is unknown. ‘The wother ship

which escorted the two emall beatae wae attacked, but evaded its

attackers and escaped. There fa a possibility that soua team or boat
crew menbers may heve been captured and tf co, a “show trial" may be

expected.
6. | Preposal t: to o Fors « ond 4 Suppert a Political Action Comtttee on

ee

This project was not approved as proposed. It was agreed that :

che concept wea ecund but there should be further. exploration as to] f

Pye


--- Page 60 ---
13-00000- sis

hy
My
i

SECRET ~
EYES ONLY.

e336

= 9 B .

/ Giuteer private capital could not be used instead of governsent funde.
The project wae referred back to CIA with the suggestion to explore
whether the World Counetl of Churches er the KNationsl Counctl of .
Protestants and Jews wight be interested in obtaining and concrtbutieg "
_ funds for carrying out the aius set forth in the paper. 7

+ (Sromus = ensetead seston 96
- This operation was approved although the Special Group senders

' agreed chat until afcer the elections chere should be no new effort
o had initiate operational activity among the Greek sk voteranes)

Soe tee ret ;
8. Yiecnam > Coup Plotting

Mr. MeCons expressed hie fear that the top U.5. diplomatic and
ailicary offictale in Seigon are becoming too involved in eouversations
between General Bou and Coneis. Such involvement could destroy
Conein's usefulness snd involve Ambassedor Lodge snd Generel Harkine
fu operations difficult to deny.

The Special Group authorized the eending of s coordinated massage
te Lodge acd Harkins euphasizing (4) the setting vp of a sore secure
eysten of contecte vith General Don and other Vietnancse ailitery;

(d) che preparation of an E.beasy assesement of General Don's states,
the group he represents aud future plans; (c) the Cightening of contre}
over the Don/Coneia usetings.

Special Group mexbers agreed that they should firm up their policy
thinking with respect co Vietnam before Aubassador Lodge returns to
Snould be token: nt Mr Wase Bas Co say on what courses
ef action should be taken.

(Signed) »
Paul Eckel
Distribution
Mr. Johnaca
Mr. Gilpatric
lr. HcCone

GECReT
SEGRET
rere OA


--- Page 61 ---
a ea

even f an NI ry

6 November 1963

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

SUBJECT: Minutes of the Special Meeting of the Special Group,
5 November 1963

PRESENT: Mr. Bundy, Mr. Johnson, Mr. vance, and Mr. McCone.
The Attorney General, Mr. Helms, Mr. Cheever, Dr. Wheelon,

and Colonel Steakley were present for Items] “and 2. The
Attorney General and Mr. Helms were present for Item 3.

“1. Cuba - Sabotage Operation in Southeast Pinar (No. 3105).

Mr. Helms briefed the Group on the background of the mission and
on events leading up to the infiltration attempted on 21-22 October.
On the basis of available information, the best estimate is that Castro's

_ security forces penetrated the reception committee and laid a trap which

resulted in the capture of some personnel.

The subsequent press coverage of this affair renders the further
operational use of the mother ships REX and LIDA to be undesirable in
the immediate future.

2. Cuba - Infiltration/Exfiltration Operations
Mr. Cheever presented a low-key sabotage operation, No. 3111, against

a warehouse and pier on the north coast of Cuba. This activity is to be
carried out by a small commando team which will land on the pier and the

warehouse.

Mention was made by Mr. Cheever of some problems with British patrols
which have unwittingly exposed some of CIA's operations, Mr. Bundy stated
that he would mention this to the British Ambassador and CIA would follow
up on a service-to-service level in order to prevent further unnecessary
incidents. :

.In addition, the Special Group tentatively approved two other operations.

These are No, 3112, a sabotage operation against a sawmill located in northern

Oriente Province and No. 3115, the infiltration of a radio operator to provide
. communications for a ratline.

Mr. Bundy has placed the above three operations on a "fail safe'' basis

: pending concurrence in each case by higher authority.

See special minutes
for additional items

i


--- Page 62 ---
13-00009..

3. Cuba. - Peace Feelers

Mr. Bundy stated that is has come to the attention of the White
House that Castro would like to have a talk designed to bring about
some kind of "arrangement" with the U.S. To hear what Castro has to
say and to know on what basis he might wish to negotiate would be of
some use to the U.S. Mr. Bundy suggested that for this initial talk
Mr. William Attwood, currently on the staff of Mr. Stevenson at the
United Nations, might be a likely candidate since Mr. Attwood has been
in touch with Mr. Carlos Lechuga Hevia, the Cuban Ambassador to the -
United Nations. Also, Attwood has a fairly friendly relationship with
Castro based on previous acquaintance. :

In the Group discussion which followed it was thought inadvisable
to allow Mr. Attwood, while on the UN staff, to get in touch with Castro.
The suggestion was made that he might be removed from his official UN
status and then go to Cuba for the ostensible purpose of writing an
article for Look magazine. In this way it might be learned how badly
Castro might want a detente with the United States.

It was suggested by Mr. Helms that it might be profitable to
"war game" this problem and look at it from all possible angles before
making any contacts.

A further suggestion was made by Mr. Bundy that Dr. Rene Vallejo
Ortiz, Castro's aide and personal physician, might be flown to Mexico
with Castro's proposals and discuss them with the U.S. Ambassador in
Mexico City.

The Attorney General emphasized that as a prelude to all this the
U.S. must require some fundamental steps such as the end of subversion
in Latin America and removing the Soviet troops in Cuba before any serious
discussion can take place about.a detente.

Mr. McCone stated that it might be possible to use again Mr.

-James Donovan who is known to have excellent relationships with Dr. Vallejo.

Vallejo might be flown to the UN for such talks or better still Donovan
could go to Cuba.

It was decided by the Special Group members not to try to reach a
firm decision at this time but to study the problem for several days and

attack it again.

ul Eckel

Distribution

Mr. Johnson
Mr. Gilpatric
Mr. McCone



--- Page 63 ---
errno

EYES ONLY |

SN

6 November 1963

_ MEMORANDUM FOR THE SPECIAL GROUP

SUBJECT: Cuban Operations

At a special meeting of the Special Group on 5 November,
it tentatively approved, subject to higher authority concurrence,
three Cuban operations scheduled for implementation on 8, 10, and
13 November. On 6 November higher authority disapproved all
. Cuban operations scheduled to be run into Cuba before 12 November. |
The two operations dated 8 and 10 November are therefore disapproved.

uu

Distribution ©
: Mr. Johnson
Mr. Gilpatric
Mr. McCone

oie Seer



--- Page 64 ---
12 November 1963

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

SUBJECT: Cuban Operations

A meeting was held this morning with higher authority on the
above subject. Present were: Mr. Rusk, Mr. McNamara, Mr. Robert
Kennedy, Mr. Bundy, Mr. McCone, Mr. Johnson, Mr. Gilpatric, Mr.
Vance, General Taylor, Mr. Heins, Mr. FitzGerald, Mr. Cheever, and
Mr. Shackley. :

Mr. McCone gave a brief summary of recent developments inside ~
‘Cuba. He stated that the military is generally loyal to Castro. °°
There have been some disorders but not very extensive. Castro's
internal security forces appear to be well organized. He has devel-
oped a system of informers which is becoming increasingly effective.
The economic situation is ‘deteriorating largely because of the
enforcement of economic sanctions, and Hurricane "Flora" although
its damage was not as great as originally thought. The Soviets
appear to be continuing the gradual withdrawal of personnel from Cuba
although recently 1,000-2,000 troops have come in. There now seems
to be a kind of "Soviet MAAG" program concerned mainly with training
Cubans in all types of military activity including the handling of
missiles. There has been some removal of the more sophisticated types
of electronic equipment. Some new tanks have arrived in Cuba, esti-
mates run from 25 to 50. a .

Mr. FitzGerald reported on Cuban operations under six main
headings: (a) Covert Collection, (b) Propaganda, (c) Economic Denial,
(d) Disaffections in the Military, (e) Sabotage and Harassment, and
(£) Support of Autonomous Anti-Castro Groups. —

(a) Covert Collection. Mr. FitzGerald pointed out that
inside Cuba CIA has three kinds of agent activities: (1) "singleton"
(2) collection nets, and (3) agents involved in “black net": operations.
x While there is encouraging improvement in the geographical spread of
these agents, there is still, understandably, a fairly heavy concentra-
tion of agents in the Havana area..

. A question was raised as to how many agents in.all of
.s@.activities have been lost. Mr. FitzGerald said that in the
hborhood of 25 had been either captured or killed in the past year.

EYES Om


--- Page 65 ---
13-00000

ee ie

LY

The reasons for these casualty figures are the increasing effectiveness

_of Castro's internal security forces and discovery brought about when

agents try to obtain food. No matter how good the documentation, an
outsider in a community is viewed with suspicion.

(b) Propaganda. The activities of CIA in this field are
the mailing of leaflets and.radio broadcasts. Some 30-40,000 leaflets
per month have been mailed and during a day there are 32 hours of
programs emanating from seven different stations. It is believed that
there is a very excellent listening public. The programs appeal to

people in a wide variety of jobs and professions. There is some jamming

but it is spasmodic and generally confined to Havana.

(c) Economic Denial. Mr. FitzGerald reported that the U.S.
economic denial program is contributing to Cuba's declining economy.

‘Mention was made that the economic denial program would be more effec-

tive if the Canadians were willing to cooperate. Up to now they have
not gone along with U.S. efforts, and they are supplying many items
essential to Cuban economy. The UK and Spain are continuing to deal
in certain types of goods required by the Cubans. Commodities going
into Cuba in 1962 from the free world. reached $101 million. While this
represents less than in 1961 the amount is still too high.

(d) Disaffections in the Military. While the military is

loyal to Castro as has been noted there are indications that: some leaders
would like to break with the regime but lack courage and opportunity.
Mr. FitzGerald commended a CIA-DIA task force which prepared a report
covering some 150 Cuban military leaders. Out of this figure there are
some 45 which look interesting from CIA's operational viewpoint. Mr.
FitzGerald reported that CIA is in touch with three persons who are in
the military or who have highly placed contacts in such circles. The
aim is to use these three individuals to establish contact with military
personnel inside Cuba. The principal aim is to get military leaders who
have become disenchanted with the Castro regime to dare to talk and plot
Castro's downfall with each other.

(e) Sabotage and Harassment. Mr. FitzGerald mentioned four
successful sabotage operations against a power plant, oil storage’
facilities, a sawmill, and an underwater demolition operation against a

. floating crane in one of Cuba's harbors. It is believed that the publi-

cation of these successful sabotage activities in the Cuban press has
tended to raise appreciably the morale of the people. Also, such ;
sabotage continues to keep pressure on the Castro regime and adds to the
growing economic problems facing the country.

(£) Support of Autonomous Anti-Castro Groups. The question

was asked from.where would the autonomous groups operate. Mr. FitzGerald
replied that they would operate from outside U.S. territory. He mentioned



--- Page 66 ---
13-00090

_two bases of the Artime group, one in Costa Rica and the other in

Nicaragua. Also.it was hoped that the autonomous group under Manolo Ray
would soon get itself established in a working base, possibly Costa Rica.
Mr. FitzGerald said that much could be accomplished by these autonomous
groups once they become operational.

A question was asked as to what decisions remain to be made. Mr.
FitzGerald replied that we were looking for a reaffirmation of the program
as presented, including sabotage and harassment. When asked what was
planned in sabotage for the immediate future, he said that destruction

-operations should be carried out against a large oil refinery and storage
‘facilities, a large electric plant, sugar refineries, railroad bridges,

harbor facilities, and underwater demolition of docks and ships. The
question was also raised as to whether an air strike would be effective
on some of these principal targets. The consensus was that CIA should
proceed with its Planning for this type of activity looking toward
January.

The State Department raised questions with respect to sabotage
activities in Cuba. The thought was advanced that there may be a
relationship between such hit and run attacks on Cuba and the delay of
American convoys en route to Berlin. A further question was posed as
to the over-all importance to the United States of sabotage operations,
especially since it is so difficult to keep them from being directly

‘attributable to the U.S. It was thought that the hit and run type effort

might in fact invoke loss of support inside Cuba and may even result in
bringing more Soviet troops back into Cuba. . Somehow the U.S. must pin
responsibility for these activities on:Castro. The U.S. in fact must be
ready to retaliate when it can be fairly well established that Castro is
attempting with arms, money and men to foment Communist uprisings in any
Latin American country.

The consensus was that since CIA's sabotage operation is in the
main low cost and since it does worry the Castro regime, denies him some
essential commodities, stimulates. some sabotage inside Cuba and tends to
improve the morale of the Cubans who would like to see Castro removed,
CIA should proceed with those operations planned for the coming week end
(November 15 through 17). .

The view was expressed that CIA, in connection with the Department
of Defense, should concentrate on attempting to catch Castro red-handed
delivering arms to Communist groups in Latin American countries.. It .was
determined that during the next 90 days from this date an attempt would
be made by means of air patrols and surface ships to identify ships
carrying arms for Castro to Latin American countries. It was hoped that
a ship with Cuban arms could be picked up. Conversations are to be :

EVES Orit


--- Page 67 ---
13-00000 : .
’ _

OY

i
EVES any Jobe
me GR

initiated by the Secretary of the Navy with CIA to map out a three-month
operation against Cuban shipping. It was also determined that the
Colombian and Venezuelan governments should be asked to join with the
U.S. in deve loping a joint patrol designed to identify ships. carrying
weapons from Cuba destined for revolutionary groups in Latin American
countries,



--- Page 68 ---
13-00000, sc

x

EVES ORLY
15 November 1963

MEMORANDUM FOR THE SPECIAL GROUP

SUBJECT: Minutes of the Special Group Meeting, 14 November 1963

’ PRESENT: Mr. Bundy, Mr. Johnson, Mr. Gilpatric, and Mr. McCone.

General Taylor and Dr. MacMillan were present for Item 1.
Mr. FitzGerald was present for Items 2 and 3.

})}U.S. Support of Foreign Paramilitary Forces

General Taylor proposed that an ad hoc group be formed consisting

‘of a representative from CIA, Department of State, and Department of
i Defense to review U.S. programs involving support of foreign paramili-

tary forces. The countries given in the following list have internal
security problems and all have received U.S. support for paramilitary
organizations:

Bolivia — Iran
Brazil Iraq

* Colombia : Cambodia .
Ecuador Thailand 4
Venezuela Laos — 4
Peru Indonesia - i
Guatemala Pakistan

The Special Group approved General Taylor's recommendation.
Mr. Bundy suggested that the agencies concerned make recommendations
for membership on the ad hoc committee to the Secretary of the Special
Group. This committee will arrange for reviewing programs in the
above-mentioned countries and prepare briefings, reports, and recom-
mendations for. Special Group action. 7 _ : ce eet

2. Cuba ‘- Modification of Revised Schedule of Proposed Infiltration/
.. Exfiltration Operations for the Month of November 1963.

_ Approval was granted by the Special Group for the following:

Operation No. 31111: The -exfiltration of a previous ly-
infiltrated agent.

Operation No. 3711: The exfiltration of two members of

- an existing resistance net.

See special minutes
.for additional. items



--- Page 69 ---
moan

-2-

Operation No. 31110: A sea rendezvous with Cuban fishermen
a for the purpose of establishing a
ratline into Cuba.

Operation No. 31112: An exfiltration operation to be
accomplished by members of the
'DRE using MRR-owned vessels.

Cuba - CIA Request ‘for Department of Defense Support of Autonomous
Operations. . : ;

Operation approved. - es _ soe comer ae

4. i Laos - Review of the Total CIA rrograd. '

, The paper on the above subject was noted by the Special Group.)

5. [Zibet - Status Report. 9S

The paper on Tibetan operations was submitted by Mr. McCone to the i

‘Special Group for information. Since the paper was concerned with . u

collecting intelligence no Special Group action was required.7 u

6. : (Moth Vietnam --Monthly Report No. 10.7¢
this report was noted by the Special Group.) Lo ee

Vaauebel

Distribution ,

Mr. Johnson
Mr. Gilpatric
Mr. McCone

Foe


--- Page 70 ---
13-00000 as

ry " ecember 1963

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Minutes of the Special Group Meeting, 6 December 1963
PRESENT: Mr. Bundy, Mr. Johnson, Mr. Gilpatric, and Mr. McCone.

Also present were Mr. Helms and Mr. Cheever.

Cuban Operations.

Mr. Cheever briefed the Special Group on Cuban operations proposed for
December. Approvals were granted for the following: —

Operation No. 3121: The infiltration of agents for the purpose of
establishing a base on an off-shore key for a ratline.

. Operation No. 3113: The infiltration of a team, including a radio
operator, designed to establish operational contacts with Cuban
military personalities. :

Operation No. 3114: The infiltration of an agent into and exfil- ,
tration of agents out of an existing internal net.

Operation No. 3122: The placing of a 3,000-pound cache of arms,
ammunition, and demolitions in support of an existing internal
resistance organization.

Operation No. 3123: The infiltration of a team to further develop
an existing ratline. ~

_ Operation No. 3117: An underwater demolition operation designed to
sink or damage a Kronstadt or other Cuban patrol vessels while in
anchorage. :

Operation No. 3124: The placing of a 100-150 pound cache of radios
and weapons on the northern coast..of Cuba. :

Operation No. 3126: The infiltration and subsequent exfiltration of
a team which will attempt to establish contacts for the development
of a ratline. ,

The two sabotage operations, No. 3125, against a sugar central, and

No. 3116, against the transformer yard of an electric power plant, were
deferred by the Group for further discussion at its next meeting.

beige

Distribution
Mr. Johnson
Mr. Gilpatric
Mr. McCone



--- Page 71 ---
13-00000 : ~

5 December 1963

i

| aan
MEMORANDUM FOR THE SPECIAL GROUP :
SUBJECT: Cuban Operations

Special Group mewbers approved by telephone on 5 December
the following: :

a. Operation No. 3711, the exfiltration of three sembers
of an existing resistance net.

b. Operation No. 3118, the infiltration of a five-man
{ team for the purpose of sabotaging a railway bridge.

c. Operation No. 31110, the establishment of a vatline_
into Cuban ports.

(Si med >

| . Paul Eckel

Dietribution


