
--- Page 1 ---
14-gegng" p= * 7
104-10111-10094| | 20: THE |
25 RELE
ASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY AS:
- y I! SASSINATION RECORDS ACT O 992 ]
- . . .

employment 26 4 Type A part time employes. In August 1958 Subject
advised that she was divorcing her husband and wished to be reinstated
as a regular staff employee. Her reinstatement was approved and in
November 1959 she was transferred pack to Washington, p.c., PCs.
During her employment in( Pa amashe was under OpCeover- Back in
Washington she wae assigned to DDP/ WH, Support fatt, Logistics
Section. © . om ae

ome

6. In April 1960 Subject legally resumed her maiden name.

7. In May 1960 Subject. was certified to the State Department
in connection with ninety day proposed T DY in Havana, Cuba with
IJMARC; and in October 1960 she was transferred from Havana to
Guatemala. a ; . Coo . Le

cee

8, In November 1960 Security was advised that according to
: ‘Informatioa from "the Project" (presumably JMARC) Subject had, —
a _ hile in Cuba, allegedly been having affaire "with the three people’
who were tincarcerated in the Cuban jail". This allegation very pos~-
i. sibly was exaggerated and from information in the file may have been
untrue. However, a Security officer on the Project seemed definitely
under the impression that one had been having an affair with one of
them, i.e.: (pave CHRISTY nd was of the opinion that her "immoral"
behavior was "a prooabie Sontributing factor" to then recent arrests
of Agency pexsonnel in Cuba. According To another version, appar-
ently hers, she went out one evening with( T) and on other oc-
casions bad group social contact with him and with two other TSsD
technicians who arrived in Havana three days before she left to go to
the United States on leave. On the Saturday night prior to her depar-
ture on Sunday, phe and het two roommates, she said, entertained
these three men in their apartment.

9. In Guatemala, Subject met and dated a Ronald Stanley
DAVIE, an American who was "wanted" by the FBI for car theft and mail
fraud. According to Sudject ahe found this out by checking "the files"
and reported st to ber superioxs. Also according to Subject, "It was
decided" that there was “go real harm" in continuing her relationship
with this individual "a9 long a8 I kept on guard"; and she continued to
date him until the day he suddenly disappeared from Guatemala City
on 24 January 1961. She had, in fact, expected him for dinner the even-
“ing of the day he disappeared. . ° ;
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only = == ~~ .
Do Not Reproduce

«-2-

ee

