
--- Page 1 ---
14-00000

104-10232-10004|

| 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 ~

10 Cetobor 1961

MEMORANDUM FOX THE RECORD
SUBJECT: heeting with De, NIKO Cardona on 6 Cetober.”

1, De, LAG arrived about 3:50 a. m, for the meeting we had
sot at 10:66; again ne was driven by his secrotary whem he introduced,

As during the {iret meeting, she remained outeide inthe car, Our
meeting lasted until 12:00 noon, : _ :

2. Foret, Dr. MIRO-handed me a note in tongland listing the
topies diseussed with mo on 3 Cetober, These points are

a. Groups conducting props zands, otc. with Agency support
Should receive theiz Support aad bs coordinated through the Councs},

: b. A propaganda campaign should be waged by tho Council
aimed at:

a) Cuba, via a long wave radio station In Koy Year.
{2) Cubans. in Miami and other U, S, areas by:

fa) Subsidiaing Diario de las Americas.

(bo) Contracting for time on radio tations.

(3) Latio America, with a plan such as the Opezacion
! Grieta,”

¢. Vsaderground Activities.

(1) Provision of monthly funds to Council for procurizg
Cuban peace to send to the seven-odd Fosiatance
soups in Cuba through rellable chanacle (euch aa
previously sent through the fthtian t mbasey),


--- Page 2 ---
14-0000

(2) Commando action as outlined In plan proseated
to me on 6 Cctober, .

3. Commando Plan

. Then Dr, 24180 handed me a plan (in English) for Clandestine.
action prepared by his military collaborators, whom he named ag
Colone! A‘anwel VAKELA Caotro, an officer of the Acadomy, Captain
Enriquo DESPAIGNE, and Colone! (fnu) MONTSACUDU, He stated.
that they were of the BARQUIN group and had boon prisoners,

“ith reepect to tho plana for clandestine Operations in Cuba,
ho otated that 360 men Could be counted upon for commando action, part
of them hore, partin Cuba, Ho reiterated that a commande operation
was oacential to bolster morale among the anti-Castro elements in Cuba
aad In oxile a3 woll as to conduct sabotage that would further weaken
Cuban economy and tna Communtet regime. He said that for thia operation
u. 3s. be'p would be necessary in providing weapons, aramo, deraotitions,
equipment, and funds, Ha proposed that {f this plan wae considered to

‘ havo merit, that I arrange to have someone moet with his military mea

to work out tho detalis. Afar all preparations had poen mads and
matorie! provided, ete. the operation would be purely a Cuban affair,
(NOTE: Plan turned over to Thoinpson at cur nv eting at 13:30 on

6 October for tranemisaton, }

4. Request for Arr, etc. to send to Escambray

Dy. MIRO remarked that over & month ago he had made a requost
to Clark for arme for the anti-Castro tosurgenta in the Eecambray, but
to date had heard nothin relative to the request. He commented wryly,
“Tack but nover hear an answer,'' He said that the fightere there should
be supported. Dr. MIRO stated that he hod a boat (provided by us) and
& means for delivery of the arms. Oavaldo KAMIREZ is chief of the

Lecambray group. :
COMMENT: Has anything been done about this request?

5. Information on Arms Received by Castro Razime
anne eee DY Castro Razime

Dr. MLUKC nonded moa a long repart which he said was brought
to him by the Argentine Ambassador to Cuba whon the lattes caine to the
U. 3. at the time of Hresident FRONDIZ I's visit.* He sald the Ambassador
would not divulge the source of the inforinatioa but commented, "You will

know, "'
*Report turned over to Thompson on 6 October,


--- Page 3 ---
14-00000

Dr. 2:IRO sald there wae no way to determine the accuracy
of tho figures given of plaves, guns, etc. received {rom the Soviet bloc
(end Baly and Canada) but even if the figures wero exageratad 100 per
font, they would still be tmpresaive.

: _ He added that Castro ta daily becoming stronger militarily
with weapone and with a large militia of close to 300, 060 being trained
to use them while the ecozomy continuse to deteriorate. Ferbaps aly
half the militia would be effective, But that is sizeable, Thus, he said,
the Janger the dolay in positive military action to overthrow Castro, the
greater will be the task. ‘Wo must act goon, vigorously and effectively,
to ineuro victory. Anothor defeat would be disastrous and would make
Cubans, Latia Arnericans and others believe Castro to be invincible,
Then would come accommodationa and ever worss, the {raplanting of
Castro-bached regizsea in the hoaulsphere., And the U. S. would suffer
worst of all, being discradited for defeat and ‘guilt of interference,"

ao

“In tho UN no nation would stand beside the U. 5.

6, Proposal that Council 39 to Cuba with Commando Group and

Establish a Government on Cuban doit

Dr. MIRC then declared that he was ¢oavinced that Castro
weuld never be overthrown by all the propaganda, tho sabotace, commaado
ralde, guerrilla activities, rupture of diplomatic relations and deteriorating
economy, and that it was inconceivable to establish a governmontdrexile
for nothing would ¢- me of it; that the only solution for defeating tho
Castro regime wap for the Revylutionary Couacil to Bo to Cuba and estab-
lish a yovernmert on Cuban Boll, ask recognition by all friendly countries
and military assistance of its principal ally, the U. 4., and that the La
be ready to intervene immediately with its Forces. This would all have
to take place ina matter of 42 hours, otherwise it would fail, I recognize
that thio ts a bold plan, but boldnosg 49 necessary. Thore will be many
rigks, many may be killed, As for myoelf, I don’t care if I die, Ihave
lest all my persona! possessions and my son 3 a prisoner,’ He rejtorated
that all must be well propared in advance, there mast be no vacillatioa,
Svorytiing must proceed Fapidly. Firet, a comasaado raid tn force to
asize a piece of Cuban territory, prefarably near Cuantanamo, and imme.
diately the members of the Council x0 ashore, proclaim a provisional
government, brondcast by radio to all nations an appeal for recognition ~
{and cables prepared in advance would also bo dent out}, requsst U, 5,
Beaistance, aad the U. S. should fursish Buch assistance at onco in ado«

qaate strangth to cnaure victory,



--- Page 4 ---
14-0000

yh .
elu

Before such an actin ja undortaken, the engmy must be
Boftened by propaganda, Sabotage, raids, underground action, and the
mass of the people of Cuba roust be Prepared te accept the Provisional
government through propaganda, increased knowledge of tha Council

and ite unifying efforts,

- Dr, MIRO asked me what I thought of this project; did I think
that Castro could be overthrown tn any other way. I adroitted that
strong military action sppoared necessary. I otatod further that
of course his plan would have to be studied at the highest government
levels. He proposod that ho micht elaborate a plan with his militar y
collaborators, and I Suggested that ho do thie oo that it might be oxamined

and considered,

Dr. MIRG doclared that he wap convinced that this Communtot
daggor in the cide of the States could enly ba eradicated by such action,
that the U.3. 19 and will be blamed fsr al! anti-Castro Propaganda,
sabotage, etc. and that enemy states will denounce it for iatervention
in Cuba, but that U the UL £, 2oe8 to the aid of a {rlendly revolutionary
regime established ia the country and helpa it defeat the Sovtet-backed
Communist regime, all friendly governments will applaud,

“I have no personal political ambitions, declared BAO,
“I merely am trying to chair the Council, whose mission is to unify the
&ati-Castro clemeats inside and outside of Cuba, If the team ton't con-
sidered effective, then change the pitchar, But I believe the Council must
establish ftself on Cuban oull, and soon. Time §s against os. ""The . unta
del Este agreement will backfire against the U.S. if Castro Is allowed
to remain in Cuba. In a year, after the politicos of the countries ra-
colving U. 8. ald have gotten their hands on U. 8. gold, they will say,
*Thanke to Cactro, we got this." And they wil) spend it ag 23 the past
with no benefits to the social and economic welfare of the Peeple,”

7. Views about the igdgee and Lawyers

T queried Dy. MIRC as to kis views relative to the judgeo and
lawyers and their futare Status. He said he hoped that they could all
reunite and that they could Se sivon assistance as in the past. Me de-
clared that Dr, ALABAU wag not qualified to be a justice and that be.was
dotng acthing but Making polities sad trylag to discredit the Counci!
and MIRC and VARGNA, Dr. .URC declared that he, as Prime Minister
in the early daye of the Castro government, had named ’ LABAU to the

oa


--- Page 5 ---
14-0000

Supreme Court, but that now he considered « LABAU unfit to hold any
Judicial position,

8. Members of the Revolutionary Council

Dr. MIRO remarked that he had a meeting of the Council on
10 Cetober. I asked what elements now Composed it and what he pro-
posed to add, Ho named the following as prosently in the Consejo:

Rescate

30 ds Noviembre . os
MIRR :

Accion Democratica

20 do Mayo

AAA Indopendients

MDC

Montecrioti

He said he had invited to join:

MRP
Unidad Revolucionaria

and awaited their reply,

He would also ike to have the Workers, Students, and the
Professionals (Doctors, Lawyers, ete.) come into the Council. He be-
Meves Batistianos and Comunistas and elements unwilling to cooperate
should be excluded, but that all other groupa should be brought together
under the Council,

He contends that all anti-Castro activities, except clandestine
and military, should be coordinated by mombers of the Council, but that
the excepted activities should be known only to him (MIRO),

9. Probable Axrgentine Rupture of Relations with Cuba

Dr. MIRO declarod that he believed imminent the Argentine
rupture of relations with Cuba. He said the Argentine Ambassador to
Cuba (Julio AMOF DO) «za ordored to return to Havana fhe had been
vacationing in the U. S. after FRONDIZI's visit); that VILLANUEVA, a
Secretary of the Argentino Embassy in Cuba was coming to see MIRO
today; and further that he (MINC) had received @ phone call last night


--- Page 6 ---
{rom a Spantard (Nicanor FE RNANDE Z) in Buenos Alres, urgiag MIRO
to go to Buenos Aires to arouse ant!-Castro sentiment of the people,
inasmuch 29 some Argontine action acainct. Cuba appeared imminent.
(FERNANDEZ said he had already written MIRU a letter.) MIRO oays,
“Of course, I cannot go. Thave the Conzojo meeting on the 10th.
Furthermors, Iam going to New York on October 11th or 12th for the
SIP (Socieded Interamericans de Prensa) meeting and have been allotted
12 minutes to address the meeting.” - : pee

10, MIRO to attend Homage te LACE RDA Brasitian who

Precipitated GUADKUS' Fesignation) on October 15

| _ Dr, MIRO said he planned to remain in New York City (after
11 and 12 Cetober SIP mocting) until October 15th to attend the homage
for LACERDA, the Governor of Guanabara province in Brasil, MIRO
probably will stay at tho Park Chambers Hotel, but will advise Clark

"of his location,

I commented that I would probably remain in Washington next
week in view af his plans, but that I might go to New York City to meet
with him; if so, I would get in touch with him and arrange a meeting

time and place through Clark,

11, Propaganda Commission

Tasked Dr. MIRO about hie ideas on the future organization
and structure of the Propaganda Commission. He etated that it is out-
side the Consejo and not under his direct control, although the Council
accountant has been passing funds to it. He said CATRRILLO had resigned
ac head of Propaganda and that he would ike CONTE AGUE ROC to handle
it. He claimed thet MESTRE had not dona anything with propaganda,

12, MIRO‘'s Views Relative to Supreme Court Justice or PRIO

being Kecognized as Head of a Provisional Goverument
Retna Mecognized as Head of a Provio! ee eR

Tasked Dr, MIRO ff he believed that there were many anti-
Castro Cubans (both ta and cut of Cuba) who favored PRIC, or the head
of the Supreme Court to be the provisional president if a government were
to be established on Cuban soll. Dr. MIRO declared that the revolution
fe a fact, and that practically nobody wants to go back to any former
regime. The people in Cuba would resist any such poseibility, He de-


--- Page 7 ---
. MIRO said, “The businesa phone is also in my house.
except in my house, but that phone lo always busy (JE (forson 23-4680),

Onin

nounced PRIO's activitica againat the Council and its efforts to unify
the anti-Castro elemento. He said that the peozle ahould be given an
opportunity to elect their chief of state aiter Castro's overthrow and
reestablishment of ordor in tho island,

13. Offices of Counci)} {Consejo Rovoluciona rio)

When questioned about his business and private telephones,
T have ao office

So use the other phone (JEfferson 4-275!) when you wish to call me,"

"I naod to have a amal! office somewhere away from my home
because all the activities there are driving my wife crany. I want toe
{ind something modest a0 that no accusation can be made of ostentation «
merely & room for myacif, one for my secretary, and one for meetings,
of the Council, ete. The FRD had a place but at that place also was the
proses, the rofugee center, ete. R would not be eatiofactory, The FRD
is sow practically dead. B wae the forerunner of tho Consejo as the

unifying agency of the anti-Caatro resistance, "

14, MIRO's Views on Coordinating the Activities of Cthor Exile
G

Foups

After Dr. MIRO reiterated hio view that he should be the
channel for {unde and coordinating the activities of groups outside the
Consejo such as the Students, FORD (Labor), ote. » Taaid that I under-
Stood that sore of these eloments were unwilling to function under the
Consejo; and that tn view of that eituation, did ha consides that an :
Activity Committee might be organised with a dolegato from each of
these groups and under the chatrmanahip of a member of the Consejo,
Thia would sorve to coordinate their activities, give them a tie-in with
the Consejo, yet not make them subservient to it. Dr. MIRO replied
that this would morely set up cacther Consejo outside of and parallel to
the exieting Consejo. I did not pursue this further, not having enough
background of these organisations to be able to diszuse tho matter.

effectively,

13. Telephone Convorsation with MIRO on 7 Cctoher

Before my doparture from Miami (or Washington on 7 Cctober,
I telephoned to De. MIRO from the airpert. He appreciated the call and
asked if I had seen in the morning paper the action taken yesterday by

vali.


--- Page 8 ---
SoG.

tho ALABAU Lawyers’ group in proclaiming Julio CARCE RAN (one

of the chiof justices in exile) as "President of Cubs at Var." He exe
preesed hie indignation at this unilateral "political move by ALADAU
and his adherents among the exiled lawyoro and Judges. Ho added his
best wiahes to me and reminded mo that he would probably go to New
York on Cetober 11th or 12th for the SIP (Sociedad Interamericana de
Prensa) meeting. I repiled that I would appreciate if he would contact
Clark after his arrival to give his location in Now York City, and that
Clark might have a request {rom me for an appointment with him, if
this seemed deolrable, I suggested that tn future Phone conversations
I would bo known as JUANITO, Ha agreed with ploagure that this would

' be a good procedure. I wiehad him Gedspeed and he replied Mkeawise

to me,
16. Comment

During these first two meetings I andea-ored to establish
myself favorably wits Dr, MIRO and therebre refrained from bringing
up details of budget or opposition to any of hie specific proposals.

I lstenod, asked various queetions, and ho talked at length,

In future mestings, after I have gAined further background and
have more policy guidance, 1 shall be able to discuss with him opeeific
issues and endeavor to reach agreements or Compromises, as may be

- vequired,

Kees
‘
e

