
--- Page 1 ---
a —_s

eo s a
ECORDS ACT OF 1992 a
04 10174-10065} 4 {2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION R ~

4 Cae - , ° &
MATERIAL ULV IERED AT CLA NEADOVAT Fs py
housi.

ASSASSINATIONS STATS MEMBERS

SELECT COMILTTER Ox

FILE TI TSE/NUMBER/VOLUME :

LACAN, SENT! SEXCPY ELLY
PEL = DESY RQ

VO. / ’ / / / .
INCLUSIVE DATES:

: .
, CUSTODLAL UNITY: LOCATION: —_

OV FILE
DOCUMENTS MAY BE COPIED OR RENOVED FROM THIS FLL
Ko 1ENTS



--- Page 2 ---
14-0000

MATERIAL, NUVIEBED AT CLA NEADQUAR ERS by .
Steer COMUCTTEE ox ASSASSINATIONS Stare MEMBERS

house

FILE TITLE/NUMER/VOLUTE: LeCauey, LER! SEAGCC YE LICY
| A 2OL~ 2657/0
Tn. "

ANCLUSIVE DATES;

: , CUSTODLAL UNIT, . — a ‘

LOCATION:

XO DOCUMENTS MAY BE COPIED OR REMOVED FROM THIS FILE



--- Page 3 ---
14-0000

* : SECRET

. “92 July 1969

MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, SB

';" Chief of staticn~

H Celebra fion of Polish National ‘Day.
22 July 1969

1. The undersigned attended the celebration of the

Polish national day at the Polish Residence on Insurgentes
-Sur on 22 July 1969. The following points were the most
.. sigaificant: .

a. The only Soviet the undersigned could
identify was Col. Konstantin Nikandrovich BOGATYREV,.
the. Soviet Military Attache. Someone the under-
signed's wife talked to mentioned the presence of
the Soviet Consw but this certainly was neither
tin LOGINOV: nor Yuriy CHERNYSI, and ‘the

undersigned aid: not meet that pexson.

be Whether the Cubans were invited or not,
they were not in.attendance.

¢. JiF1 SVESTKA, of the Czech Bubassy, was
Per SB Section briefing, the undersigned
oned his departure and told: SVESTKA that at
least he would remain in Mexico. . SVESTKA. said that
this would not be the case, that he. is acheduled .
to leave within 15 days for Czechoslovakia. The
undersigned then mentioned a conversation with his
Czech friend in which the latter told him that he
expected to stay in Mexico for quite a while longer.
SV.ESTKA denied ever having said this, pointing

out that he was. glad to return homé. The under-

signed made no further comments.

“SECRET



--- Page 4 ---
14-0000

SECRET

ee ,
3

d. The ex-Haitian Ambassador, Julio Jean
PIERRE-AUDAIN, was geen by the undersigned but
left before he could talk to him. ‘In view of the
fact that’ PIERRE-AUDAIN ceased to be Ambassador.

. of Haiti a long timo ago,. the under signed feela . .
ti ig presence at the Polish national day ~ : :
bratio

has some significance. ‘He ‘remembers -

‘PLERRE-AUDAIN ‘was also present. at. the Cele- |
bratton ‘of the Czech. national day. this: year. In
other Words, the Communists have made it a point

~ to maintain contact with him, probably in view of .
the fact that PIERRE-AUDAIN may return to Haiti if
something happens to DUVALIER and may secure a
position of some tmportance in his country.

2, The President of _the Consular. Association, VOURVOULIAS, ‘
told thé undersigned that: he would contact LOGINOV at the .
‘Soviet Embassy to see. whether ‘thé latter would agree toa.
' Joint. celebration of both the. understgned' 8 and LOGINOV's
departures in a party to be held for both of . then at.the same
time. - LOGINOV ia ‘not scheduled to leave Mexico unti:
September 1969, a departure postponed from the > original
schedule of late guly or early August. :

Raymond A, FRADYER.

Distrivution: . : - ue io.
. Orig = 7 (Consular ( orps) - oo . . / :
7 . Ge P-11712 (LOGENOV). a eo -_
theese oo 1 = POVIEIL CSVESTKA) ae a

: 1 - P-3407 (PLERRE-AUDAIN): . -

RAF: Imp

SECRET . ‘



--- Page 5 ---
14-0000

SECRET

22 July 1959

Residence on Insurgentes
; points were the most

Bb. | wh
they were not in

ro SECRET


--- Page 6 ---
SECRET: =,
-2- '

: tay
in contact with hin, probably in view of
“that PIERRE-AUDAIN may return to Haiti if
g-happens ‘to, DUVALIER ani say secure a
of some importance in Nis country.

Do PITT: .
V = Be7ill (SVESTEA) ”
1- P5407 (PLERRE-AUDAIN)

RAF: Amp

SECRET

on, YOURVYOULIAS, 4,


--- Page 7 ---
14-0000

3

nesting file an

Sontact Resort:
Subject: E1QvAI-1  (p~903) . ie
Bate of nects guly’ we t Hoyo 19 at 1470 nre :

'

i. rimtes. .
rlace.
ry On. Fridey vuly 12 f&. reculer lencniese Class
: . JS ied :

to L-2 ané 2-t wT rhetes hir interert to ceet the Cow cirk et Lisscosle

Ja. % 2Qiel shy he telieved *
cave hin the cover ptory ;
i z+? that

eatrre of conv st explaiced

x soer-a't told |
he Sound kin
: teld Ris obo

LOG told tin that Ate was hte. reoretary:
get clore to her. |

46 Tel felt
he wer on the ©
no recsen of feel

2 delieved thet
that there tee.

wv

<2 teld me thas ea a

aduer’

Five $9 2



--- Page 8 ---
‘ia ‘Cuauti lan, Tunch ool vex :
& Tepotzotian fFoml100 ‘to ‘scotre. on 17 July 1508.
x«Consul. Gea. of Greece, |

sis 2 creature of Aner, cit and e

“Cons ise ‘Corps.
who led excursion. In allition to helpiag the two

- Leander T.. Vor vou!
teers work: into. cousular €

over anil ‘aake contacts, the purpose
aot Cubena who.

rst “haa & eSovy, Bloc
{ 3lec anid nd Cutis. RENAE

i e churetienonoents | hee , foaktiar .
aie’ but vos

quite Chaeat aevertiaslesse SiMtask Sidtone at ten teed x
Movever conversatiun i noucuous ‘*s

1 iatroluced Sy Fra lyer as Fralyer regia euent.
Frayer aad Leginov

rbal 8; varridg dete,

and pninterasting coapared to constant ve

which Sistose will defar to Fralyer to re; port af ve sees Lite


--- Page 9 ---
14-0000

+4

su3 af uuirpo Consular de. ii

fficers and:

,201-€50177, 7-13, 766

WiVESS -

and Yalentin LOsT! 1712 of the Soviet Znbassy

“whe appeared very reluctant -

eols to. LOSINCY. She p:

t



--- Page 10 ---
2, AOLOVECY was, 29 proviously ‘Uted, more veserveds He stayed

prea

in the background ind accompain-d the unidentified Tusstan during most.”

dace? to ia but Little conversstion
-
passod dDetwcen them. Hoe appeared s Litt leistif?, more tha Pusstan

sterootyre of the reserved, cocial-tll-at-2a32 perscne Fut this

was Justx an impression as FoRALEL had nox | chance for sn in

conve sat lone FOLOV.EV seamed to possess * decent. spanish. “Ee

aredal section.

. other Corps meetings end Fst ail have an 0750: :
i to hin at creater. lensth. : , :

— | oA eee

ae UG A FLRALLZ | =

‘ _

hi | . .

we


--- Page 11 ---
14-0000

Cire ey
Meno for the Record: .
‘ . Ve :
SURVECTs Firet, Siatone ena gerlt Cover Jeb Outing with Consular Corot
; Brief Initial Exposure ta Soviets Loginov ant Geleu zev

chos ae ; bE : (phere hurl a _

ete gS o Consular, Corys is ‘satura of “nner. cit and ex-Consul Gen. of Gresce,

fe

Leander r Vourvouliag, who ted excursion. ln adlition to helping the ‘tre

tie purpose,

officers wor

new Sta, (o consular cover duil make contacts, .

of the outsng da pa

Sov Bob. ;
clay eu: v h Gileszev

tify the other,

bags | Sidtone a

quite ‘tient tieverti

f introiliced- -by Frailyer as Fealyer replacement, However. eenversation i néucuous-
and ubinteresting cutpersd to constant verbal aparring betws Fradyer and Loginow

which Siatone wall defer to Eralyer to report if he sees ms
4G Slt py bi b?

SECCET , an I MALQ

fa


--- Page 12 ---
[2-00000

‘1a

: oo, Pagel E CCE] a Sy tute)
Ly , + C/tvd — Cre: buy ‘aa : Crater oS u H) ay

Meso for the Records
SUBJECT: First Sistone eaten ‘Cover Jb Outing with Consular Corpst

Brief Initial Exposure to Soviets Loginov and G. low tev

T, tereuce ‘D. Sistone and Leealeve
“eeoapa aed Gwith wives) Frosyer oa eo outing: of..1 "Ey Con wet le :

Span. col. Couvent at Tepiotzottan frowli0o ‘to 1900, ‘on. Mt duly 1969. .
; Consular. Corys is ‘creature: of Aner. cit and ex-Consal ‘Gen. of Greecey So .
ahs. ‘Leander r Vourvoulixs, wao Ted excursion, Ia allition to “helping the two

mew Sta. officers work into consular cover ant gake contacts, the purpose |
is who.

te suting. | ia part wis to see at firet han the Sev, Bloe aal Gi

a5 to the ce. Three § 5
No: otlier rtieulucly inte

people 6 t

: f. Sere
e ant acl independently identified “Lee Ks hel ayo che
ene ‘of two comwercial ‘types fro aug book-were vanble ‘identify the other, ,
’ was quiet end erdly tuked as. te tagged alo se Ga olen te was also .
‘quiet Lut was engaged” ‘twice by ‘Sistone in. conversstion, das one occasion &
3 there os reault recent Sovelex
at) eolleague :

Jew ow:

dhe had been in ‘Mexieo ‘phor

auaents he fasiliar

sore ornate aut ia, cessive thon Byzantine chureh=
ke Sona, sith Wsavy acceat aul lida%t ‘tali much but was.

i briefly to Loginov and

h in “oscow.
te’ Fraent nsvertisdess. SXRLASL Siatone alsa take
However conversation i anucuous

intfoluce’ by Fralyer oa Fralyer Te; plageuent.
and uninteresting coapared: to constant verbal sparring pete. Fradyer aod: Loginov

7 whieh Siatone will defer to Fralyer to report if he sees fits

.

|
|
f

seccet



--- Page 13 ---
14-0000

‘13

July 10, 1969!

Contact Keport 7 a oY
Subjects. LIRAGON=1 (7 ¢SO5') © oS
Date of Meet: July 9 at Parense. Rostdurent-Bar (Heston) at 16 0:

a : ingot meets el came on tines the. Bi eo daeted 2 ‘noure: ‘

and 50 ninut ; : .

: Hoxt meat: Wed saiy 16 at "1630 at: pick up place in Recobedo
with Gutenberg” . : \

On July 9. at 0915 bre Il went to the Sov Babasey to look tor
e722)», A. Bov girls reoopeioniet tod hia that 406 was not

ae a Oe

jut ‘that the 6 irk wae:
whiz t to talk about.

- 5, Regulte of this conversation: —

a. Alla LNU is in Mexico city. lese than a year. She ie
bored to death here and 18 looking forward te returning

! to Moecow ae soon as ebe will be allowed.

b. She said that Mexico had a pleasant climate, but ell
she knows sbout Mexico ie Ousutla and even when she
ie invited there she hae no company of her own (sic). |;

@. With regard to her sohooling: after ehe fiotehed i


--- Page 14 ---
‘ - . . -2-

hiph school she went to 6 school for mechanical tech
nicians where she studied about. a year ‘and gave 4% up.
becquee she. did not’ Like it. She. competed: to enter the.

and ‘she @ appeared to be pleased “with the idea.
“@. + Decgriptiont apparent See 25 - ~ 26% night sbout, 5 tt

“asa not hear: from: 106 it would P
be" no. good.

ant atta® | sone: acne thay agreed: to meet on | Monday Jiny ‘14 at ‘the:
Marinera restaurant at. 1500 hre (av Chaputtapec with or near Liverpool).
‘Both of them stated that they would be there without fail.

9. Vith regard to the meet LOG - L-l1 I repeated my previous in-
etruction to L-1 concerning his attitude if LOG comes out again with
the request to meet LIOVAL~1.

10. With regard to L-lw scquaintanse with Alla I euggested Ll to
aex his sother about her. fhore 1a a ponsibility of finding cut hor full



--- Page 15 ---
14-0000

}$

{ :
| ve

“name and whether ehe 1e married or not. I~ should aleo sention.to .0G

- the fact that ‘Be met Alla while waiting for. him. Depending on the finde
inge li should eon der inv ting Alle to his ) house for lunch one. Sat. ;
or ‘Sue and take he 4 to

aunen and: ponsidie entertainment, ie) will. diecuss. the. J
defore doing sinything. . ae . : . :
1. el reported that he had a. 90° minutes talk with Karel WENDIRL - ‘
(rsee Attachment) and I debdriefed him on the same. ‘There were very few

‘ facte which wore ‘not ‘covered in the previous report on VENIaL. .

i W2..

{kel stated that he ‘would

4 44d. not eee KARPASTEC un
had. puty Leng period. of work tn th
{
i

extended for the sane amount of t:
pleaced. Tel. commented ‘that fa tha



--- Page 16 ---
14-0000

i
i.

fe hema bend ne ee ae

oh

Contest Fepert i) og
: #13, -
Subject: Jimny SKECRI. iJ :

Date of meets. July 7 in gubject® car and | Insurgentes Sanbornt Rer —

qe. ‘ feet ' was s prearranged: with gunject for my 7 at ‘ber

Paseo at 1400 hnre. Subject pki ed to our office in. the course of the.
morning to eyz confirm the arrengenent. ( FERGALD wee trying to reack
Subject. to chenge the place of neet, but he war not able to reach hit),

. Subject €id not show up at the Del Peseo and efter waiting 40 minutes

F vent home C. his office }. at (1535 bre F wae. infoed. vy “the office:
thet- ‘Subject Galle - ‘several times acd his latert statement vas that he
wo ld be in front of thie Cine atino. { across: thie. Referaa’ fron our :
Snbeesy }.. F came: there vn tine. but Subject maa not Ground. Due to
wee bound ‘to. stay. there and et 16 ‘hrs Subject showed
Ssiv itiag, Borieville, blue. 7a. h light top, plet af
iiefair’ *Ueiack). Subject weved to F to ect in the
bs Frpley oe ban Had Bene, fro & aZ MOCK
ib ject stated to. ? that he goofed, because he

t “where: we net twice previously . and after cone.
nis notetook and realized that he.

i “then; Eubject | stated that He

of ther cer ana ‘he asked B to

heavy rain ?

Liquor and ecterved the “pot.” about: S$ min utes ‘tater “he oseet and
ve entered an old, beaten up Valiant ~ithout license pl tes and the
ace is hard to teil. . :

= During the first ride Subsect tolf 7 that LG prored hin
E . P
eo

portpone2 Sheir
y mente bre ont of

on “rideay Joly 4 and told sir +

nett zeheduled for tle next da;

the: rould rave to

erause he

town en Sat.end Sua. Tes wanted to ceet vith Cubject on t.on or iue

Se oe 2 W2

ry:
Poy

Pat


--- Page 17 ---
14-0000

17

{

| meade. to get to. the pe!
; bas no close’
jo Zevelor one af Los

‘ew 2=

.

and Subject told him that he could be taken. and working with 2

: ; ‘American vusinesszen who would arrive on Sundey- §
ig t 3 ( they did).
L AVAGA, probably on Thursday July 10, -
put woul phone t hid to arrange for 8 meet before coring to his ( aad

“tennis hat. for iy

t ta visit Jorephine &

Subject néded that

LOG raid that as

Josephice’s } épt. LOG also: recinged Subject: ‘& to ‘prepare: hia for

that. mect. a: wet tea. report oa the opi on of vex
the Inters ericaa “‘Beonoeic Soafe’

officials. -ebou a

Spain. : APM.

3. after returgzng fron the gpt subject gold

a saventae: m
for tneiz next geet:

people. “ gecided to give or not te give the. a

passing: ¥ LOG. * toid subject ‘that ne mess
into the picture a. ‘nonexistit
“produce. ‘Taeréfore,

cicada coverntent
erence: at Port of

thet, 103 nea,
AM

phoned to gesepnine end told her that he would visit then ‘on Thur.

A a dite after 2000 ars and thas he. would bring to dosepnine 2 vot? feo

# when noua | he arrange for ‘a meet

rne, they do not epeak about 7
cak thing, to do would ve to°

e petal | g£ax ire” with LOG. to. neke arrangezeass
Budject. agreed and asked ? wretaer our security

rectory to him for

ed the matter by oriaging

return fron ner Leave aad he dses not “nov wey.”

tetricié shicn we. ware net able to
is getting. rid of Patricia, ~ sthich

Surject really

AL “Bmboesy end is willing .
2 04 setting ‘th e@ ditec
ns ‘how to Zo ancut it.

ao 1 have to otate: taatecke aid. not

tory: Subject is

6. At that point “a subject and F were airady at the Diana

Circle ‘end Subject suggested ‘ras they stop fo

ra arink ir Tnsugeates

at Saaboras which ie only a couple of blocks free nis office and F

agreed, They rerained there about 59 ninuteg.

Te eubject stated that the Atrectory

“

hag Sec

one a problec. i


--- Page 18 ---
14-0000

l3

. -3- .

conmented that the existing problea waa creeted by Subject and his

; ee eith the instructions the only way out of it now is

0 do whet 2 told bim in the car. x :

8, In reply to Pr question subject atated that tre 2 americans

| re nere on Supday July 6 were interested in Anvesting ‘eegital

ane ager artes a housing project for people of low, inconé. Ke added .
that. one ‘of them is. owner of a mining corporation and the .otherone.

an ‘fe fron. the Benet ficlary { ‘4f rembered correctly) Trieuranée Ce. Ee...

ap 4 “ ‘Deldves that they were satisfied with the findingsm put it will take
Oe about a month before the eal materializes, vecause ta2 approval of

“appropriate board was needed, ,

Subject. showed to Fa ceiling card of Ir. C. Lester NeGee
- of Noon Valley ‘Mining Corporétion,
eet), Dellas, Texas. fhere were at least
Sted which P did not remember. Subject went

e was interested in buyine platioum, but
hat.‘once the Sov,

f on. to sey that ¥re wal pee
F Subject told hin. that Nexieo ‘nad no. pletinun, and *
were trying to sell” @ quantity in Kexico. tr. Baetee told Subject

to loox into ane matter and. explained, him the mechanics of the deal.

“Sove vould: hove to make e firn offer to 2 Swiss Gompany which is’. J!
controlled by. a Ganedien company which is 4 a subsidiary. of: ae

an- American cor: “pany: ultinste. deetinetion of + 2 pletinun ie the

; ‘y tae deal “is: all the way taroued - a elean legal err
conaereial transaction. and terms of payment sould we Irrevocebie, ~ me
Soatirned Le@ter of Credit, each on del ivery in Switzerland. The

uéuld be 5,000 inées but tere. is ri]i_to Duy up. :

plat : sexed Ge vhould he ,

en ee te

intial ‘pure
to 1 ciilion dollars orth of |
aek [OG ure tee Sovs intecested in the deal py

ee reer eneagnit nent a eye ee
co

10. - F told Subject ze etould tell about it to L0G if there ts

a coaniesioa for the pereon sno facilitates the deal. sccordinzg to

fubjest there in a UE21.- cogmiasion per ounce if ce can provide : .
the goode, F told Sudject he should express tue desire that 500
oitaty the inlo rinself and if the ansver is favorable and the
right then LI7 can introd:ce Eubjest, to she Sov oficial yeho F



--- Page 19 ---
|4-00000

at . ~ : -4 .

be suthorized to close the Jeal. Subject acreed to emphasize the
attractivenean ofthe comzisaion end the advantage of the fact that
the deel is handled in Switzerland and coanequently the commission
ie also paid there. F sole Subject thet he wanted to kno? 4n detail
LOG reaction concerning the eoraission, Subject should aleo pley
erouad with the theae that it would te adeal it LOG could trevel to
Switeeriand to introduce hia to the Fight perron (Sov) and siniler.

wm . , Subject connented. thet, the. vuyer is ser Lous 8 a: at ‘renains te

de Seen. are the Sov willing | to sell at 8 convenient. for them but still:
_ fai price. Subject went on to: say that if the deal was ta go well

he would have to go to Snitzerland, and this aricea another problem,
i.e. how Long would it take fx him to get, American Passport, “because —
‘he id presently documented by his Birth Certificate. ? told hin

to start thinking about passing tuet bridge when he comes to it.

: - 22. ~ Sudject & peared, to. te eaxtisfied with Pa Ps attitude in. the above -
conversation: -and hi ated that with this matter show ing up plus .
: hat and: ‘the: weitten, report there, should he enough for & neet -
: F told Subject ‘that ne fanted a carton copy: of the. report ~ Sw

he would head to LOG and Subject procise ‘to rake one.

13. | fren, Sihject observed that in order to place the business * ie
talk with LOG in the right prospective te would have to see LOG before
Er. eGee and ‘nie companion Lear iy which” means. tae lateet on Ved noon. .
Guin to go ahend and make frre: généats cuieh would-be norzal -
Me . trying to pusa the plataaua deel, but. at ne gete to see

L0G. before thur at his (oresttines} epts he. should e edyise 7 by phones.
i.e. leave 8. nessage for F | to ring nin up. ,

Fy

zr, ” Coitment vy Fernaié:

+ am!

bs Even if nevhi e couek out of the platinus deal,
which is quits its “ely, conversation about it

and the acscelated commission, should give us

; qe " gote readings on LOG on on? hand and on the cther
i w ened nore light ca the personal reletion hetreern ,
Eubdect and LT.

relation wetreen corephiae

sy tg eny the Lesst.
.
~ ° tirernelf

b, The se call-{ social
J ani 224 ie inteswes

t
wee



--- Page 20 ---
14-0000

Q0

i

ATTAOUMENT
July 9, 1969

” Bubjudts Valentin LOGINOY (P-11,712)
_ Source? stnay SABORT

ad Aecordtng to Source 10¢ phoned him on F; eer fay ‘ ‘et 1100:
‘bre and tcld that he would be out of towr on J na_6 and,
cohsequently, would want to reschedule’ thaer SS ia froposed
‘Monday or Tuesday and Source told him thst he would be buay sf with
pope ‘American pueinesamen . LOG concluded that he wanted to visit . :

. Josephine ALCAYAGA Segues Heke woek wné wild do it probably on
‘Ciureday” (suly 10),. but will Phone earlier.

a According- to. Source LOT: does not miss a week to give a
“ring- to vo pina ALOAYA A juet to. say Hello.

a

During hia phone oonverdation nentioned in ‘para ut ove”

qtne following are Loe's statements made to Bourse sone of their’ a
previous meter. ; oS

with Monterrey Gouania de Seguros, Bells |

’ Nexico- Oty.

b. LOG told Souroe thet’ it wae good. to have a friend
“on the othe side", mesining American eids, deoaure!
one can never tell what might happen. ,

co. 4&4. eres ot ‘nt ha fre Mersey € of kil FL |

FuFernald



--- Page 21 ---
14-00000

oN

Se. . with regerd to. the ‘visit ne: Froi

- because ‘he ‘feared
| interest it him nor and previously: he vee avoiding ht

" gaid he would do it os rridey July 4 at 1015 hrs. :

. faehuel info. .

‘is convincing iimrelf that he santa te Liv

Contact Report 507 ; . ;

Subject: tbauuied « (F=$505 :
Tate of Heet: suly 2 at Paris-lexico pe tgurens at. 1640 Wra. ok

> prearrenged acet to: vpich Subject ‘came on time. oad. ecetag —

ae “he drove eround . ‘Beveral Blocks" and returned to the prearranged :
Flace 6 ainutee later. :
I paid, Ll Kil, 090- ealary for. June: 169.

Yext meet: yaly a with the pick up at the same place at
615 hte.

2. Lel told me veut the evening ne srend with LIOVAL-1 at the =
Sov show. He. reported the matter exactly as LIOVAL-1 did and, added thst

‘in spite of his intentica to meet wita rozie ‘sembers of tee Sov group
; he did aot find tiie to. do. ite —

ised to make to” sootirov

ie evated that he. wes ‘not ‘able to make up EE
$ 105 might euspéect nin for showit

my request thet he go and see Losin OF nefore we meet next veek. He

a. I told L-1 that L wanted hin: to’ ‘do. more writing: ‘for us tn!
r previous egrenge t. Ee promised to do it, and

eacordence vith
Lieve that

Lel spoke gbout ‘his talk 2
ectalls,

4 «

Ae the Attacgces :
el WErDab acd he. ree {artructe? to ontede nore’ info, ef

ke in mustieo Sei

8. Zogame Su ub jee tk abs copy “of the First.
he wae alee sed to cet th @ vex. : :
Te L-1 is still livies heraoniouriy with his wife esd i-1 : ‘*

ae
r

e nite his wife acd dcee oft
want to give Bix her a rewso2 for quarrelisg. :
&, I talked to Lol ehout the neet that he oresctet eris s

peteraalé



--- Page 22 ---
14-0000

ty
q

eae qe eet

panes ees ae,

‘

_ edvise

_ that, Yuriy
would ot ec

) duly 5,. 1969.
\ ie 7
Subject: .Valention LOGINOY'=- Bio Sketch by LIPACON-1
Remarks: .
1. Concerning the- provlens. watch Log tas with his colleagues:
LIBACON-1 wae not able to offer ipecific exacrles. - to at, jeost: 3
inetances-E0G spoke to L-l tue’ 1 -atmospier within
thé Sov. Subaeay- &e horribte | stated thet there: %

not a- -eingle ‘person in the. babaesy in ‘whieh one’ can confides. e erybdoay of

is -ready to. cut otherones ” throat just to advance; if there ie nothing
the colleagues can pin’ ageinst a person they. start intriguing ‘hoping
that one might lose hia temper and coamit something stupid which
would be anfficient to hara the person iavolveds if ones aske for

all. 1968-L-1 i wited LOG to ‘attend a party’ and told hin
ANISH (p-13, 042) would be there. LOG stated shat. he .

. “becuse it would: mean or getting himself ia troutle
or getting ERNISE- in. trouvie to keep aay from. Sov ‘cblleqeues is.
the only cf keeping | put of troubles, concluded. LCG.

2. With regard to the ‘statenent thet Les wae. commiting errore

_by exterting Pressure ‘on other: "people I Eek | stated that he. reported

A. doing eo LO. abandéned..
persons L0G tank -

‘the way. “eee spoks to. Lek nade ‘at evident that L0G ‘dis-
regarisé ops security rules. -Sueh things did not happen tefore ant
Lel concluded that 237 reat ail out + : y soe Success bafere
ne leaves PoS-Ncont what Lt may". me “-

whet lel stated thet te helieved thet 245 would he a féod

7

ve

perron tnder. norael conditions, he seant that he believed that bee Le
basically. @ grog person end wonld te acting acd tehaving "3 @ good
preron in kis normal environrent, 1.¢.. if he reazined as a orvik on
the fara, or se wae a tractor driver or @ truck driver ari einiler,
eenditlone L23 could eo a pied jor end touli set |

cecaise in evon
kave to depend on rental cepatility widen he cove not have.
. ee nnn

uld in no time find out that he vas considered | ‘incompetent. ;

sdeat


--- Page 23 ---
14-0000

2

i” ~.:
1 .
. \ -2- Coo .
~ i ae | Bel does not know why .LOG expresses suck 4 great love and edF
4 ; niration for Spein and Spaniards. L-1 feels positive thayZ LOG was
: ‘ never in Spain; he has nc reason te believe that. LOG did any. extensive

i reading sbout. Spains in fect. ‘el believes’ that L0G knows about Spaia
: what he ceard fron Speniaris ‘tho: léve in the USSE and, apparently,
he was aseootating. with a sumber of them in Moscow.

nen ~- —— = ee AB eT ae

| ° BEvernsid.
i . :
1
a ; 5 .
obo oe
. t nz
ao
{
f s
i
a
i ° . ’


--- Page 24 ---
i
i
t

es muy vanidosu. Muy pocos amigos, saben que tiene una, bij a

“su ‘carrera, Le gu x

. auaque antes se déjarta cortar ua brazo t

Edad aproximada de 43-45 afios, auaque apareata menos, Fisicamente

de complexion atlética, alto, Juega muy bién al tenis. Recientemente

qued6 en segundo Lugar en el: campeonato del D.F, que tuvo lugar
° : ; -

‘en ‘el ciud francia, donde practica este deporte. Cuida avchisimo-

su coadieion ‘fisica y. nas que nada su apariéncia, Ea este sentido

16417 afios. Cuando le preguntan si tiene hijos hable ‘solo ae. su.

hijo de 11 ‘afios “de edad. Le da’ pena presentar a su mujer, que es
muy amable y buena, porque se ve de mis edad que €1. No fuma, toma +

Get

‘muy poco, aunque cuando la ocasio6n requiere de tomar mucho agecenta

Bd sienpre se le ve sereno. Es muy anable en el. trato, _Nunca trata.

/ de imponer ‘sus ideas, Pero Si snpre peidiente de convencer por las

J cate:
e que no puede hacer 16 altimo,.

eo
buenas, a sus contr

rompe diplomaticariente los relaciones avistosas on el ‘sujeto.

En sus tdeas es. de la escueta estalinista: Solo. cuenta lo ‘Uaioe
Sovietica y la altima linea a seguir del Partido, Eso quiere decir
que no tiene “fdeas propias. ‘Sigue ridelisinamenté Ta mitnea” porque

sabe nuy bien que és la diniea forma rapida y leficaz de escalar en-

muchtsino) 1 a vida ‘due na, tips occidental,

confesar elo asi ake

as con sus conpaseros ce.

Es muy anbicieso y se ve que tiene prob:

trabajo. Habla despectivanente.de ellos, No le gusta. nada ja idea"

de tener que permanecer en Nosed ics dos a%08 que vienen. Re dijo
que hartfa lo “posible que al transcurrir esos afieos lo mandaran de
preferencia otra vez a “México, Su flusiéa nas grande es trabajar
en Espasa. Adora 2 los espafoles, La forma de ser de los rejicanos
no le gusta, Por eso si quiere regresar, quiere decir que prefiere

cualquier lugar donde vivir, nenos Rusia, Creo que precisamente

.



--- Page 25 ---
14-0000

‘

porque ya tiere que partir en julio, es por lo que ultimamente. esta

cometiendo errores. Quiere hacer entes -& como de lugar, presionando

a la. gente de ee s2que antes janis hacta, El dia 2 de mayo lo vi
. oe.

‘en Gciathe:! ‘y satiendo que yo Ao quiero trabajar para el, me.

insistio, Llegando a1 Seiséto de- preg atar Si podfamos| abordar a. 7

mi aluano. Joha, sin.s uiéra preguatar ‘por la personalidad y torma de

pensar de Joha: fn 1loS 15 miautos ,aue estuvimos juntos no. pavlo.
“que de eso. “Cuando yo. le dije que ya ‘le: habta ‘dicho antes que 10
ne gustaba esa clase de trabajo, nie contestd que é1 creta que lo
que me pasaba es que tenta miedo. “La forna m4s inocente de hacerme’

picar! A contiquacion, ¢ ne. invite a el dia 8 para’ seguir

hablando de. lo nis En el fondo reo que “todo eso revela cierta-

inocencia y muchas (ganas de progresar,, para llevar una “vida. muy

diferente alo ave. llevan los cludadanos sovieticos. Creo que”
_qiere dejar “una grand impresiga a sus. jsfes para no quedar trabajando:
indefinid=nente en el Ministerio de Relaciones Exterdiores ‘de tose. .

No sé hasta que punto sus ‘anbiedtones pueda darlo, a ‘ progresar

uso por miedio- de atropellar victimas, €omo: persona y eo condiciones

“pormales | ne parece bueno, generoso y- ‘t40l., amigo. Sin cenbargo la

verdad: es que nunca lo Tlegue a conocer muy bien, en parte ‘posiblenente’

porque casi desde ‘el principio sentia instintivanente que queria

algo dé nt, “my aparte de nuestra siistad ¥ ena parte porque con todo

y la confianza qué llego a tener conmigo jamas se descubrio por
- . completo, ni mucho menos. Es extréniadamente caliteloso.

Refuaiende: | ut inpresion es qué es una buena persona, de buenos
Sentizieatss, pero que una vez retido en “ese trabajo,” por razones
que desconocexcs, hace todo lo posible por destacas, - :



--- Page 26 ---
14-0000

“ab

- ia See ony al a Gate posses

Of eeepsi Ho Ore Sow se. G z nee devel E Be ee Aik ts

1 . .
Velen? ar fy, aA,

f° — . 4

Eda afceurnids he SI yy ast: eretesg ef efrerscic-
A Pet ees Aidit ed ale a or ngplegeeis alike, ale, ,
Sx ae Fits et et Cosees. Lieneela see @ freee, “eer Age,

ak Liga Ya oli Skee A kel 2 Fi get Levee Saget: cee

te Led firuetttle, levels Jerre sehen ab tales &, Greed oo

Quite coders “4 te “Bie Le dele 2. men Jone Z wevsl get senle oe

hess * : ic an
Poirier eri . La 2) a peulcle “9 ad Ve cetadeot. Peg
2, i ;
FEL? Bevin, pede fet Le fee € eeetet Ay nt COE J Peta,
yee C Ae, LL i Ot Cen & eee
Leet 4 hea prect rue Bene tepid viet Be ¢ 2e

7, ..
am ee. TF geet ete

a

: ie Le pried “peeceey , Betey, :
Bite cb. Bee, eee 8 eres wee 2

Miwin oe: Cacd 7

LiteLe a centri “e wpe az Loseupe Heetecthe ra ete ae

Hanes Zu ka toeybe a 2 4eCaaz, 7 See Pt eeeyn we ee,
Lelude ae: Less Petal?
Leerterd -

Bi Aestoene “z wee beri one Pte

a ve ay . ‘

ee Be ge te te rare . oA, a A

/.; . . : PEE. eg PM teh Mo tetas

LERW LOL Loa hae . a - s ‘

7 ERR CPO ar ee Pea Te at oWieet fact wen Gag bees Otte
a.


--- Page 27 ---
|.
a

a?

n a Fangio .
i ¢ Vande: lee

~~
peti hha Jel fens Clee pete ee fer eee oes x Oe figs. Aide
tesfirderaccstul Eat cll, “ emus Neiclhe Co eet at us
- fee Joe ensectin yee Blow’ aa ede sired o oWeeette, Kae

| AP fed Aeris ( fiutll g ¥te 2 Faucets * coreagie ;
Beside iabee a Le wt A Leta e. “apa Mb, whe «eu;

Bee ct petted “ ihe by fie f 4 ee Be
zs. Ab fowe A He. 2 a y *

410" Wn getlil t&, ‘in, ane lias geet we
Fars ene Ver; - sees 3007 PEE : Cet’ pe Letce ie swerll

JE got yh hie got forts man Ae “ee en
phe poset heeds Cb20:¢4 tees tte Cstddy seeatieles |
Lee JOO sty ape oe fe oo
jee hace . EC deh fe Clea yf) LE 7 ete tte ey .
feet ye tee pace tee Ai Gop: fe a BY, “ted “aente|

[Mbapprseals at Jie Cy A PEG cae Bote sear eevee. eg |

thes “ahh pn tee Ake, UKE»

. 2b Liles €Y. TCL wee fia Ae.
Pe fen pos ke? Mee “eee, gett atl ore
ht EE vA Ate bie hi tek Bt Gee ee fe
ited Fras aisle [eeemeanneenida ” Dene! CO Cts

sre vee ves ELE eee :

ee as : . we ae
eee DHteg ee tee ee erence Les tcne Sete |
“a ~~.

i

at wat le
. 7 Bh Cone ae

Bat len

ae WE.
/-

e al |
7 :

Gerla, -;

PA ibe 2

pe “y Sage sted Le

“fret 2

on ae Oo vee loses: Pa a ae

2 fated ste Lk

ae cere eget ameeer ene meee yy ana,

tee, a Pe ae

2 :
Merete. we teen be ede green tes

J ate thee

be cle nvetecs eel ge lO a eget tds

atte rd



--- Page 28 ---
LEE: id he Z , ,
. Wee ec ate yee tee Le Deer fetes Leonie “, Po Sha: a OF

,
a Pg 726284 crediery foo saigh. le lolli leas
Luce POPATIER Lac Le telebeeree? seers seer a weed fatedetd
| fone Zicns, ghee 7 we. eee ior 3 Le Leng -
. : Le ieeilael ft Sact geese PA ae “t coceveds seceeas
7 ne ad Ate a ale ontluuut proxe ¢ CR 6 Liv foe
‘
i

. 2 _ 7
oe wehl evlgfadrcieted gut sitet ge ee sent, “feestg: ¢
Frege? | Cerse "hx

,

theile te ceed th detec Ail y * eer fade
ae

- . 7 /. 4, Aafareze je Ga Pho eeseteegie
. 9 tal fe fe fet eh bE, Lea seen odes seeeey,
: , & ethics tascinde Canker _

a 2 . wien frPh Boog +
ed len stew aye eb se 4 fs sat ena Lae a so:

La pox pee neem tga “iy weet Pe

4 i Aas os
tee Ay cuts 3 reat OPEL VLEF ©

Aeeeeres

seh C00, |

a wen Clee he



--- Page 29 ---
OREN tA Foe wie ES

SBT >t et

, y 2 » La Led fh tows actel .
Y 5 r, i July 4, 1969 \
of ex - fe ¢ is \
Cec 4 a Logenev)

Contact Report
Subjeét: Jimay SABORI 2 4
Date of Keet: July 1 at Sepe-Perie ar 1900 hrea - 4

1... , . This neet wes held in lieu of the: one scheduled for June 30 at

f 1400 bres. Subj requested tke postpennient of the feet by phoe on grounds
| that LOGINOV did not ehow up for the neet on June 23 and another neet

with bia was arranged by Fone aad will take ploce on June 30 jet 1400 bre. *
FERNALD phoned to Subject tne same day of his call and arranged to see
himydt Sepe-Paris restaurant at 1990 hre. F who came to the meet plece
5 minutes earlier found Subject there waiting for his. The teet lasted

a houre in spite of the fact that 7 padd the bill 2 hours before Subject
: : boo

‘oO eave. “. . _ : .

. Next viret: vondey duly 1 at the Del Parseo at 1400 bra. Tote:
“2, will chance the meet plece to a more modest restaur-
- ant. -

s

a Subject frnedLetely rexed what wae thé decieion concerning the .

Zab directory whick LOGINCVads asking for, 7 told Subject that the directory . |

was hig lest. worry end that he would like to hear how did the thinse. go -

with ZCCINOV. Subject etarted ehenking about the meet (see separate isteok, i -
: ‘BY. the time Sud ject- wae tarough, with hie description of the neet, 7 odtrined: -
, convenient table end ar xe moved to it. 7 requested Subject te erite. :

additional date to hin FRQ-I which he did promptly. Then ? acked him to
write the echroro ecequence of his contacte with LOGTNOY which Subject did
by looxing in his egendy and he 414 ft “Sitheut- hesitation.

- Be At chile point Subdect told 3 that he Fad reen hin in the viciaity

of tae place where he ret vith LOGI. > atateé that he wae there and
that tha: purpose of teing thera ras that Subject cece hin, He sexed Aid

F alno see 1063 cad 7 atated that when he saw LOT coming he toved in the
direction from thie® Subject wae coming, T sonnluted ty eaying thet the
fact that 2? were shore hirself! ahould he eulflictert te arasure Subject thet
we keap operational cottere restricted *o a rininiz of pervon2 fax revrore
of seurtty. . . :

a P looked at what Subteat erate coneraing ita eats ARR tes

. . GNA C13, F330

’ . “+?


--- Page 30 ---
14-0000

\ -2-

and told Sutjeot that aceeniiug
appeared that LCG did rot cone to the meet echeduled for June .25 ent
not as he put it on paper. Subject repeated what he wrote and confirmed
: that on June 20 SAFE aid not chow uP and on June 25 LO& ‘atéexxs came
and, Subject did not show up ( LIgtBRacz surveillance confirned the latter
statement .). ? observed that on. hit first reet with” Subject on June 23 oo
Subject said that he had a meet with LOG on June 28 and told hin that: he-
7} hed no. time to try to get the directory. Subject ‘showed no enbarrassnent
A and. he told # that hé cust heve ‘wleeundertood, ‘Subjects atatenént. ,

5. F told Subject that he did sot follow Fe instruction in epeaking

to LOG about the directory, specifically, by bringing up a nane of

Patricie which created a problem without which he would be auch better

off. tha fac’ if that Sub: jeg? krcws nodody in the U.S. Embessy. Subject |

: was ‘of ‘the ‘opinion. thet we. can always: introduce hin to: a pereon in the ~

Lay. the rele of. being his acquaintance. F told Subject thet

we were not Gey Alling rabdoite out of a fiat and all our actions were
conducted within linits ‘of security. “hat Subject was suggecting was @
complete disrezard for our as well his own security end the vest thiag

he can tell LOG on their next meet was that “Patricia” did not show up ,

to the plore reerece he left for 7 it

“" Zmb hie can.

, bee yet. oe . .
bole 6s. " Tt may ‘ve. noted that 78 attempt to  devriet Subject on what: ,
‘transpired at each of: bis eaets with Loc did aot tear deoired reeults,. .

: Subject stated the feats | he negtioned to F on thet ee first meet and etarted:
_ repeating hinselet ashe going on. Therefore, F BS ; decided ts get as de-

‘ tailed as possible deccription ‘ef the lest geet and Sudject was cooperative. .
Although, Subject. .@poke ‘s¥eut the ‘Test mest at the ver ining of our weet
be did not «sina, trylas purtiags it in Requeace as it ‘took. place. roa what
Subject sta sed “S¥evious maess it may be rortavnile noting thas Subject
had @ party at his apt on dune 10 and he asked LOG to come to tae parsrty.
Iw explatied Subject that he did not lize to be seen in large groups
and ha seat Subsect 2 bottles of Votka for tre party. Subjess 1180
atated that in 2 - 2 instences te prosieed LX to ring hic a tennia
fetualiy, £03 weuld like to have 2 tenale rata, one

hat Proc the 1,5.
mith a-vinor and the other trge with e ria around, aise large. Tubiect

nad an opirtunits of dolay ft, but at tre proper nenens be forgot about

ie. LOC esillg ‘rings up tre facet thas Subject forget aout bin and :



--- Page 31 ---
14-0000

*

H
H
H
i
t
‘

. . -3 -
his hata, Subject acked F was it possible to eet those hate for him.
? said he did not know 1f it can be done. ee e.

Te: Subject aeked 7? that type ef a reception will be givén on 1 the
> { 4th of July ty the Zab and weg there something arranged thet any Americad

a could drop in, ae signing ‘the book at the imb. > promieed to proce to

i | sweet in cage ‘there wae sonething like thet. — :
8, after eoveriag: the ground as contained in the 3 attachnente
P asked Subject. wan he: willing to back ‘his. eta wenents wita a po
| teat { # used the expression ‘lie detecter teet’ ). Sudject reacted oy

a asking thén did we went him to take the test. ? conrented thet he did e

not say that Subject would be given one, he only asked would he be willing

to take one, if we arked hin to do it. Subject etated that he wae willing

t& take the teat at any time. nen, he started arking questions about

the test. especially, ro usually gets it and. how it worke, Vith recayd = - oma

to who- gete F atated that enyone involved in matters. having degring on .

' the security of the U.5.. and as te how it rorke, there ts nothing. to iti

it regleters when a persoa eeye & lie es the stenach die ests sutocatically

anytt. ine @ persons eats,

9. Comments vy FERNALD: ¢

a . e, Tain meet enables us to have a better, Lasight ef
ad . a Subjects personality. : :
: : Db, There are valid. indicatione that Subject ie not. .
i . : witsnolding i in: t ‘info concerning his personal
a bistory nor tis : ;
i “5. 5 |. 9, Hde claim te have’ numetous end to. an extention. influent=
: fal contacts appeare to be acceptable. _
pears to he eoopgerative, ‘tnt nae a tendency te >
tion eived to hin concerning
nin attitude toverd. Et te peseddte vat thin
is due to hie.convinetica thal he knoze L937 better tsaa
me Go end that we ere teo desmatis and not enough
flexible. At tae sane time this may ve due to the fact
teat be Jove glandentice aa for the eake of
usr on one hand
cur crérased esuree
ein “ich cages

a,tie also: 2
deviate: fron -th

> froa :

3t action
he would b¢ left without # cane he Likes. .

a. it espearasyeiie ctytour thet ¢ udeets Chae astal

conditions are ast roe, tut, enperently, ve hae
a enaiter,. 1% veil draped ang [See at Lave to wrrry .
erout being bunery.cnerecere thera Le Lele enough rood
for rin to! yeni the Life na plearsa.

: givernealéd



--- Page 32 ---
PAG. 12 ep bene

. 5 !

unio de 1969
gary |

DF, Viernes?

eye

Fded

La meat

-. dias pasados, estuvomuy -|

anjinade.
EY organizador de este

evento deportivo, fue |
Apulia Fa des-
ral Longul:

Resukaron triunfado-
res: Hans Kaspareky bea
triz de Baccn; Valentin
-  Longinov y Meche Pinto;
: Ralph Wiegandt y Gloria
: de Pinto, quienes obtu-

Vie > vieron el ero, Segun-
7? ; do y teccer digares, res-
‘ . pectivamente.  -

. sobs . Por ta ngcho, bos espo-
sos Pinto, Jose y Glorta
ofrecteron una Nesta en
Su rsidencia donde fue;
ron entregadua los tro
fee = Aqua las foie...

Ui Nene Keparek, Nezrs
Bacon y Victy Aguila.
RXa ole grape... ch drew
tot basis Gonws, NDIA?
Corea Mu Bown, Re
ben Hoan Crate de Mata
Agntan Aguilas Vaienta
Lainguinos » Muth Rae
Sut > los ganotuca dd
Tamme: tions Kaspared
Beatie Dees Vania
barmgruines Metag 2 wre,


--- Page 33 ---
14-0000

Le oe Ream Re nite mee peel a nme teat ne

. Pa Sete rerenns fa ne wet!
BoA oe Ns . ;
4 o, oe \ 7 ~ .
. Soy

June 27, 1360

MN Sees

» Ewa
Tr ATR OR

oe obin w! ee Reed

“Contact Report f- DP) VEIL

Sutjects Jamee SAPCRI ; cer
: Date of Meet: June 23 at Subjects kpt at Fabia dé Sta Forbara 20/508
: . AY De Mid - Seg Hey
(a Gn. ase 1 4 Merny

ae i. Arrangperents for this beet were nade through the office end
the fact that the phone which Subject: ‘Left. with our office. vas oat of
i . order made it neceeeary. thet SUPSUALD es] en Subject at-his apt... It sy
woe 1 be noted that Subject is in the process of moving and the only firniture
, in the living room of the above mentioned apt consisted of two beaten. up
easy cheats w/o arm rest and a sort of an end table loaded with papers, ens :
"a telephone; another Phone was on the Floor in the corner of the reon.
. Taere wee co much dust on the floor, that it is difficult to believe thet _-
: ‘the apt wae in any ure during the. lest 10 aeys. :

2.° Subjects NEG ADIRESS: Leibadte 207 apt 7 phone. (31-53-95 :

‘Offices Freceionedora ce: Be jio, Incurcentes Sur 429 office 12 ;
{first floor}, phone 64-63-47. _

Subject can be reached hone until O$%0 in the norning ond in the ‘of.
between 1100 and 1400 bre and in the afternosh betreen 17° 00 gnd ace.
Subject etated that it would be rather difficult to fing nin in his © ;
' office tecause of nis frequent “in and out" vOrk. a : : :

ce
hrs. a

3. Soro with us: Subject was hola: that once he yas ‘placed in
‘contact with the "proper pecple™ he should usé fron now on the ex teation

670, Se wiil identify himself &e- Er, ARvIeo ( allegedly his mother’s
nace ) and will acke for sr, Tse “(eanonna) Fz HALDS. alias. ,

”P -  FRRUAED ehowed. Subject his off; ciel lcoxing eredentiale unde
alias of Virgil 2, BALDINI ané ‘after he read trem quite carefully,

stated that now Subject knew that te was Speaking to the right person =
Subjee* conmenteéd that he ras satisfied with 78 tona fide.

Se. F first erxed Subject fev. personal questions; tie phone is our
of order beceuse he requested that it be transfered to his new apt an
on Scturday (June 21 vnen he sar that the phone wes not in operation te.
called "hia friend Cerlos T2CiYzI" to put freesure on the Telephone Co
hut ao j.¢, could te done in view of tha week-end: the elevatar dn the

ge ss



--- Page 34 ---
TNE Ra a ad en ee ale A A a ae re ae see lt neni mane ee | ne et te

oe. .
a _~ . .

-~2-

‘; building is often out of ercer, tece suse there are too many children in.

‘ the building; Subject is merricd and has 2 olilaven, dut he is freecatly

! seperated froa hie wife; eas the children finished the High School his wife -

H wanted then te continue their echodling in the UeEss Subject avoided ,
specifying. wast school his children attended here and called the echool

‘®the 4nerican: High. School? Subject has been in Mexico € ‘yeats ‘and his |

i wife ofly 2 yeare; as much er he lovesvexico fo mush his. wife aid. net get

: te used to'Nexico and ¢id not went to reneia any jocger here; the fact thet

_ he did not’ want to leave iexico resulted in tneir physical separations

according to Subject it is only a natter of days thet His fanily left for
San Jose, Celifornia, which Subject called his home town; Subject clains
that his family ( paternal side ) cones from Milan, - Italy; his greet srand
feather cane to New York, BY, end followed the cold rush to California where

_ he apperently did wells for reesons unknown to Subject his grand fatoer

. Moved fron California to Arizona and then to t Vexico (Sinaloe)} where | :

. Subjects father wae born; in the sane breath Subject stated that he, ‘too,

was born in Mexicé and when ¥ comiented that 1¢ would ‘be logical that he..

|. Waive a duel eitizenship,. Subject cid quite bit of talking toe confuse the
the previous statenent: ‘during the revolution ali the! records were: burned
end he has oniy the certificate of vaptisn iseued hy e Mexieen church and
in ‘fact at was porsible thet he wes bern on. the U. Ss. side. of the verder;

; ‘Subsect cleims he could not care less about the. poreshility of claiming
Nexiedn citirenship, he is ‘an American and it suits bin well to live in

ms this country es @ TOURIST: in, the Fracéionad ea dé! ‘Pajio he. vorke with -

. oo @ partner, ho, entered the company as owner of 2 large cavars of ‘land; ©

: Subject hed no money but he is the person sho through his connectione

obtained: froz a8 Nex cen bank 8 decision thet the bank would mortgage

up to SO per cent every structure he. and hie partner apmpie te; now he

ia in the stage of obteiaing : -erican investnent espitel to carry out

the construction of low income housing (7 écse not recall tne location

Subject mentioned); of course Subject wens shrougs financiel eifficulties

and is still facing some of ther, but no thine eersoues de nas a car of

bis own; he is coving out of this apt and will eub-let it and sake few

hundred person per ronth on the aifference of rrerent price and wheat he

is paying; this type of tranesetions cenrot eet hiniim troublee, vecsuee ;

bexteans do not care about euch thiner, he’ hoa a rier in the Gchernacion

y
!

z

. . 7 Cates oe ee ae
ane eer seein ate : . 7
- enc etree ne



--- Page 35 ---
1200000359

vho ence shore. hin thet the Soternecion ked nore than a foot high
file on him end Subjeet told hin Shey should not ‘dother trying tu do
sonething arainst hir bateuce they. cenrot even kick him out-of P_the country:
"he has a friend to whon ke is eategnised to turn if he is in any kind of :
trouble and te esked hie Got verracion to dial the phone which ke gave hin =
.and the fhone was, aneviered dy CISULROS of the Presidency; Subject claims :
thst he has influenéiel friendsin practically every niristry (Secretaria)
of the Federal acovernaent; Subject also prides ninesit with women ‘friends
he-hes' and tief *ELe0 influencial,” ; Co ——

6. In answer to Fs quetion Subject stated that he called on Kee
at the U.S. Rrbassy because he hed a fairly Close rglatios with Valentin
LOGINOV: (P=11,712) of the Soviet Hmbassy and he vould not want te ve
judged wrongly if the WOrIRN people fet to knox about his friendly relation :
with LOGINOV... .

Te F coxmented that he hoped that Subject realized that the title
_, on his eredentiale really spells Counter Intellicence, which, for example,
; médns’ ‘that if F saw Subject roubing a bank he could not care less because:

- that vould be the matter concerning the erimingl police, or if was’ charged
for having 8 child out of ¢ wedlock, because that would bé a’natter for . “
the dudiciery. ; aithorit on but when it. cones to eples theh. thet is a ratter
which cénéérne ¥ and: the service fe is working for. Tn view of the
well established fact that LOCINOY is a spy and Subject is his friend (sie)
this netter is. of cencern for the Aneriéan Counter. Intelligence. Toerefore, 2
would appreciate if Subject ‘Btu ved clearly what was the purrese of hig

visit to the U. Ss. Babassy, Subject anewered without hesitation aor
embarrassaent: “that he: believed, that he rade himself clear even at the -
Babassy that née wanted to cooperat 2 with the U.S. Service snd ve of help
ag much as it stood in bia power. F connented thet he souls probably ask

to help | the us. Counter Intelligence veforé

Subject does ne still want
#e close our vect today. .

8 In reply to Fre questions subsect ‘steted:
in February 1969
a. Ue net LOGINCY at a social perty in. the house of
sho is as is com ronly ynorn a
weve there

7 first

1h ciao nly ardAaate AI aR REE

Dr. aredericd S
Conmunist by FTP seoteey, He does not &
other Soviet officials at the party. TOS,



--- Page 36 ---
eR cane ee nde nin Ain ne a alabama oie ei aE a teem cae a

‘ .
oN

-4e

spoke to Subject in a heavy accented broken English
and was delighted “hen Subject curre ested that they
speak Spanish. LOGI0Vs general line of conv was that
the essential thing in the life is understanding and
to be able to understand others one aust cet to know
_ them; this in turn calls for having as many friends
as possible. The same applies to countries and nationa. “,
: _ . Before lesving the party LOGINOV stated, that he would
i . like to becone friendly with fuoject e and asked nia
would he be willing to meét with him. Subject ‘agreed - F
--and they met next Friday at the Tecali Rest tauzant. -

alt

om _ . b. Tne conv at the Tecali wes to an extent dealing with
: : ; ; the theme of friendship and understanding with an :
: , _ added emphasis that if there was understanding and,
“consequently, friendship between the U.S. and Soviet
Union we vould he- living in a. ouch better worlds
Subject etated his agreement. with LOG's views. In a!
further vart.of the. conv LOGINO¥ was interested in
- , knowing whether Subject had many friends in Mexico”
‘ : . a / , " Sabject clains to have stated that ne had many good ; &
; . a friends here, (N02: It is quite likely ‘that he x
_ : . . bragged about. the number of infInential frierdds he had.
yt : here). At the end LOGINCY told Subject that he would
; : ; . like te see Kin again and Subject. asked fin. to come
- ae oe a) hie house. According to. Subject, Lecinov. asked.

. would not the fact of réceiving a Sov official con Poy
prosine Subject or lead him into some kind of troubles. r
Subject assured him that the recéiving of a Sov or
any. foréizn official could act affect kin in no way. ’
Then, LCGINCY asked Subject vould they be alone and”
| _ Eubject eessered effiras tively. {Notes At this point
i i Subject indiceted that he received LOGINOY at the |
apt at the Tethutts 297), Finally, Logriov ecreed to
cone to Sublecttc ept. — '

Ge In the apt LOSINCY did not feel aS cace for some
tie. Intinlly, ce did not drink from the Yotka rhich


--- Page 37 ---
1400000 =

37

} : Subjeet poured ied he drack only efter Subject tock +
i wo, : - : a Rip out of LOG's class ( Semark: Tiis certainly sounds a
t exagcerated). Turing the evenings LOG wes repeateily — -
i o - - Y. speaking about is need to have friended rake new
: ; : a her friengenips and was pointing cut that. Subject

that he offered ‘to Loc to ‘{Inttodue
2: his he wished, Iv the course. of ednv L0G. wie. Sl

3
a
Ta

4

that he wes £0 sie, jnforned,. |
TaN. Subject Jeushed at the question and added th st oF
ERM and everyth ne assocteted 5 “3

t

OF “about | 10 adi tional, ‘testa sith —
: “used fost extensively” wis the La Cava, | rey uodelly

to: their eating

LOG counting

gar 5 = 7 blocks way from 3 7

gets out a wlock beyond. th ne cbeting glace 4 and cones Fi i

walking slowly end making ocessionsl eteps te observe a aa

whether he wae folloved. Then they cet in’a refteursn 5) im

. torethers ives ® sood leox to ev ery pereon in the : : :
t

restaurant acd reneins especielly watehfur if he res- : :
two nen together, . : i



--- Page 38 ---
e

: . £. Subject etated that the leitootif of LOG éuring those
‘ : D teeta war "heJpne ead I il] be chle to help you", -
"cet me (or provide. me with) ‘the i@fo T need and Iwi.”
——_'. Provide ‘you with info. you. right necd", ‘Amofig. the most £
seuslit info by L0G was persganlity 4nfo cn Mexican: :
Bo tieiens and, etpecially, indiestions fia.to who ?
* rte. ‘the next _Prenident of Hexieo, 106 ig very “S

* 73206 “atscounted the’ fact.
_Becording to. him the U.S. emia
_ those countrian knov everything that is to be known °
_Soneequently Je. L0G is goavinced, “nat there ourt an -

Ess, “Enbe pasay here. Subject. wae angi ring casually - 7
_ “with an "of course". €n the neet Subject haa with : &
tt eG oa dune 5 at le Cava Lec “told him that he needed” rs

. “wack of info ° hay eben ly ‘Lead.

b. With recard to Le Subject deserived ‘ata es a as ceahle, i
. ; person with quite literal view on interno tional Foe
: . bs
litice; he parstonetely hates “ruehchov ari te


--- Page 39 ---
0000

pom ae Lo te

1
deeply concerned over the aoager fied. China represente .
* to the world; he advocates that the U.S and Sev Union
1 ; . a voouhecn a cutunl defense foct and liquidate the —
i . ; Chica watil thera is etill tee - she believes thot,

; rthless, - pince wee not ‘able to obtain a sofetiring ”
: which hoc oan get ins sone other way, When F cannent ted that the diredory was
: 0 & Stehtly contreled natter and to get one would “practically. mean to swipe,

Rie the Gir etory wor
Subject. ned a friend theres” a
x0, |. ther suis beg re * neg tical p osesbinity.
; to1d ' t necessarily be
ate tement that, .

to the U.S. ander such eonaitiona shoult Se arare “thet e every piece of.
info: passed to. the oppositt fen, is this cése Int, mast, ve cleared aad
approved by an U.S. officer sh n, if nothing elee,. is a tine cons stcing
proposition, Subject Foilice esid "tine ds’ money". T-co:mented that

only predus tively used Sane te money.



--- Page 40 ---
12. In a heavy and serioun tone’? etated -that he muct ack now Subject
vhether efter the

Se “Lene
“ARy Rate v

dy; ay

expléenetion he eave he to ett] willing to cocperate

ice hager the conditzon thet he would. follon ourz..

sabecte not aentioned by

Awe §a- Lh viene .
ute SF . . oy



--- Page 41 ---
leat eile iain t

a ‘ptgnificant fect that o2 oRRISH eaue to that party mitt bis Fife. I<.
: 15:

“ huving @ romence with WAN

. “the "meet. He ‘etated thst he felt Reppy ‘to have nade up with his wife’ ;
-and to be Living again hone. Fe told me atout his arrangenent t oe
to the. Riteefan® sho. with EIOVATA2

SPNTSH (2+13, of2y: .
7 . the, 4 a tachment.

intersreted “thin. fact to ‘cave up the idea “of.
A ontaks, but wanted to preserva’ and catatain
frieaiship with ber aad her fantly. according to. Eel it is quite certata

(- yy WA



--- Page 42 ---
14-0000

June 22, 1969, e .

i
S

Gonmet: Ini waé to



--- Page 43 ---
14-00000

“30 ‘June lgey

: MENORANDM. FOR THE RECORD

o#. _ | -suByEcT: “danes SABORI -
3
i
7

At. ‘1300 hours on 20 Ju e. cubject, ‘on the recommendation
mer. : jajara), came to he

as a tour tt nnd “who ai oparently t ‘hopes to. ao some,

business here. He. is of Italian origin and apparently. has‘ lived s
in Texas, nd California. -At ‘the: present. time, he is living. at . a
Bahia ‘de: Santa Barbara: # 0». apartment 308, ~ Telephone number - is

7
‘%

. Subject refused to say very much about the naturé of bis:
: r J tin OS wa: ‘to get. a

beget “bs

fg eaten ttt



--- Page 44 ---
beeen ook . ; /
ste : a nO -2-

5, When Subject calls at 1800 hours, he will be told that
COS has gutten in touch with the "proper people” and that a-
: representative of these. people will call Subject on 23 June. AS.
5 tor the phone book, COS will say that this is entirely out of -
: his hands and that the man who contacts Suvject on 23. June_will
‘presumably deal with that. , Ts oe

LOGINOV's successor,

‘passing it, at least wit

' * on, Subject can be told and can pas
tightly controlled publication and th

come by (that is, unless -he manages ©

Subject (who .t
&

to LOGINOV, LOGINOY:
his new contact

7. There aré no Station traces on Subject: |“

ect called at 1800. hours 20 June, He was given the

8. § c s
: message in faph 5 and agreed to await a call from "the proper
. people” at 0900 hours on 23 June. He also agreed.tostall on the 1 4
i
&

2 eet a9 st eit gs yw See 4:


--- Page 45 ---
14-0000 . .

© ght Gytnstap sere,

, — . 1

ow Wwe
i" eam

‘17 June 1569

: a, Although they have ut attended ¢ any social fun net ions together
’. since their lest encounter, it is LIREALM<1's opinion that AEDICHARD is t

. generelly avoiding tires t contact with hin. Only once since LIREALM*1 told;
RD's request that LIREALM-1 work §
© play. tennis, LIREALM*1 hag seen. 4
he French club, but neither have made ny,

DIEN. ABD asked LINEA
arious occasions a

AgDiERNARD Fequested, Permission to bring ¢ a-Mexicen: couple to. . a -

“intended to dnclude. only . those who had participated in the tennis tournament -
at- the. €lud.. “Pe ission vas granted, however, and LIREAIMe1 will artenpe to
determine the £ dentity of the ‘Hextean couple at the party,

h LIREALY inl and bis wife ade ctente oe thet. AEOTEHARD fs

fons; there
t intredactng hts trlend to “LIREALN"

: Ne 1 'g Mel -after che
bétveen hin. ; AEDIEHARD , he has” Not gone owt of his ¥ I
in. convers. or cultivate him ‘socially, This night o lain’ ‘REDIE 3:
fsiress. and/or his “apparent unsillingness to fntroduce his net friend.
More inforait tc nt Lon thts subject will ‘be avaliable after the 22. June (Sfoner.

L- ‘Andrew E. PELLESENT

Distribution;
iO 1 cy to C/s3
Locy petr1ss

ll, ud

szcper

the 22 June auards dinier. This vas a strange request. since the party was - 7 .

+ cates emi tale RS iF arems

Ne TRY tl



--- Page 46 ---
NS

BAS ARE hl RS bh tA SURGE R ts Ke

os Ss
=

ie?
Frans EAS

Arce Lens seen Raying, with
Soner. Tae Sovier iS NEW TWO WE eLUS
AND 4 Reger Ar TENN.

as

: Loawaar At Sy SR TeR,
Gq ie

ois Vau's

Oy.

| Ope MQ aT NEsuM
REPLACEMENT. SINGS

(ve TS

er Tou. yuh Yau

- wowdertetnne! = , \

ve ees HAS
ar ThE CLUB, wie REPORT Ar

i AL yA

i
Naw
Pence wis) Bure ay

Tae epeF 1 WEE’
Post yTas

EEN SECA SLONBLLY

j
i
i
j
3


--- Page 47 ---
ab eee mtn st lt mak nem wat aa ea eam

, :
arene y
SUNIST : LICevL-1 (T=

“LL June 1969

“DARE OF MESTING

1. AS arranc ‘ed last month, I picked Subject up on the corner.

of hilo. and Helehor ced ro lateral.at 1100, Ye drove to the

Tastee Freeze in Polango “for coffe: ent mot until 1300. Next

oe ee

_ mecting | “All be on 9g July ate “2700, sane pick-up pleces a
1 dia scond” in tha Tough with:

“earthy and sensible. philocrehy. i Was surpris sed ate hiss. pro.

WOT) ae,

and: the ‘fact ‘that the dées oat forget neeting dates, even though

thoy "re arvenged a month aheod end there's no ‘confirmeztion. He told

me that he lrequen sthy gives. away canly and stuff to the little Sov

: kiss who come in, “‘feeline that. they'll renember it -yon rs fro: now.
: nd that this

Saebaerietieeer

hear.
as Cee 2
_ Subjaét ident

SERS Ya, BEY Ne a ei

Pat lon
a "Tigo °

TITSOV

> store but whothavo no fined -



--- Page 48 ---
LICOULAL (D-

“1d June 1966

+ through the . cards

MATIN, (P7152 ): Bera rting. Pos on 2d June’ 1ct9, Rats suffering

".. . "with an uleer, He takes sleeping pills constantly ang has b<on
a a . , coriplaining about the great anouns of work he has. Said his

‘mother ‘in the USTR ° neit ther. 5 sakes nor ‘drinks) is very reli-

_gdous. ‘She Rears a picture of Christ hi den at hone. and nany of .

ee co as to gubjyet's houce for dimer oa } June as planned. tecatise

vr 7 he couldn't. get nefidssion, SOLGHATIN’s wife will have 3 nonths

off when. they ratura to the USS2 in oder te rest up Srom-her

TIN wil have. only 22 days off. Wats going.

os Lee “york. here; But £CLO}

viry gost Sra

efferiaste.

leave, repleeenent not hrovn,

is r focnor,

“prnfehp isenas

gfe an? panticwels tera,
if ped

po vopwomurh guy. lehea otceenms e-stucas,

ad ee

bata oe ie 7 VE Lei bbe ed te te a nectar of the saerne potles,

tov Dordyaler on le Dey, es ner creiwale cot: Ente Uh: eture, Che

Souke vo oe eled Trendehy ark ter feet te sea ash a team boaad.

her ‘women friands: com: to Pray in frort of it. SUL ATTN aid not

ke charge of sone: 00d orking shops vith lathes. ant other’

:


--- Page 49 ---
FN PR I HSE

rt en
ae eee

Me ean archaeology.
up ihe ty cha



--- Page 50 ---
14-0000

‘Go tee =
. : : ‘ Saal
soe adits | ‘82a mate mangement Sate eat neo Benn dsie-h oie ianamenen mast

™

; CONTACT REPORT

SUBJECT == t_LIROCKET=1

‘ DATE OF MESTING: 29 May 19v9 at Paris en Nexico
: Next meeting 18 26 June same place at 1300 hours

1. Subject had little to report, His potes on two sessions
with KAZANTSEV are attached. KAZANTSEV said that he had no news |
on his departure and now thinks be will probably have to stay tn
Mexico until a now anbassador is appointed, :

Subject calied NIKITIN onée “and. was ‘pot able to get ahold -
‘hai yt. t: ed’ again but I asked hin: to keep at th

cognized: |
Wine

uygect’ ‘but ‘never. bo

a . b, TuCuNIN (P-3390) - Sees him’ occasionally; not very
: . friendly. .

€. GORDEYEV (P=13,091) (Subject knew his name) - Speaks
Bnglish- quite well; wanted to take lessons fron Subject but :
‘gould not get Enbassy to pay for the lessons. : . oo Lok

: ay - CHNEYKHOV- (P-6235). ~ Has seen hin. tatrly frequently but
» does not Know ‘Bim. Appears: unfriendly — .

“ee: BOLSHAKOV (P-13,430) = Supgeet says he 18 the new guard.

P11, 381): - Every tine. Subject Sees hia he
For a lung time, Suoject thought he was.



--- Page 51 ---
i
i:
'
i.
i

SB ie aan
Salt Ht teak fr teu bbacuoe

"Sy fet rt Gyhes, ewe He ~ May 22, 1969,
/ We. _—

Contact Rerort-—.~
Subject: LEBACON-1 (P-4805)

_ Date of Meet; Kay 21 at thie Paris-Kexico Restaurant,

Ql. earlier ad I observed:

‘nothing auspicious in terna of ‘stakeouts or “surveillance. The meet: lasted
, me) min. NEX? NEED; Wednesday May 28 at the same pick up place.

2. | As we vett 121 stotea that he cancelled _ the last week meet
becauee he was Seized. by one of hie nervous crisie. of hysteria followed

nr bis condition he was not able: ‘to do any Works:

description he did Hot indulge in dramatizing the natter. .
4e I asked hin what happened to the lunch he was “supposed to: have

; Sed et, :
4 4t would sérve fo zood purpose to ini if LOGIKOY would characterize hin
{ar a not desirable. person from the Sov. point. of view, He conmented that -
. GINO was a friend of nis to tae exte: t-thet he Would ‘not...
do such a th é to hin, i countered by stating that he insisted. ia cone.

siderging LOGINOV to be his friend, but what éver- LOGINOV asked fron
bir he turned him down ‘with eNO; to preserve good. will of a person it.
is neceesery to meet some of his. Fequesta and the best ia to do it when
At does no karm to anybody and at the eane tine does not get L-1 ine:
volved ia any of LOCINOVs achenen, He ngreed with ny reasouing, as he
eid at the last meet, but it 1a to be eceen vast will he do about

5. a s-) change the subject I feked L+] ‘Berea vianyal, return, fe paid

-@epreesion (ste). He inmediately added. that | ke prepared for mre nothing

Ba “In the restaurant he kept on describing: what effect the’ nerves |
Crisis Has on ‘him and hé added that” ke stil2 felt depressed. During his —

with LOGINOV ‘and he repeated what’ he told, me by phone on Kay: 8 and added | :
that ‘LOGiNov wes ‘to ead L Bim, but aia. Hot ao ate Re. dded that if LOGINOY -



--- Page 52 ---
(2 2e.

he knew nothing about VENDEL, except, that nie wife gave a_ darth to a.

child during: his absence and’he added that if VEXTEL had. 1 returned he

a would. ‘bad heer’ about its wy

now ete “returned here; she caine s with: her mother-
in Rio: Flts where they had: agworaing ap party on Fridey key 9s her —

father he a well.to do phisician in Quito, Ecuador; stie has 10 persit — ;

to work in Mexico chich neens that her father will “pay the expenses of

: her stay here: in view -o ° i¢' nervous. C isis he didnot keep in tough

murngs Boy
(note: thie lesves unsolved what 9 was teh speeking about when $o-Spoke BN G

found her ‘an apartre t

‘ :
(if fs,

about the good tine LOCINOV and SLA bad together at unknown date).
9. I tried to explain to L-1 that he should do some writing for
ua alung the lines of maxX our previous egreenent. He. préaised. .
ae

.

meg


--- Page 53 ---
~ : oT
e ind : -
Vo , _o-3-
10. Ae much as I-l 48 a compulsory telker,during this meet ke

was fratiuer on tie) quike 6ide,i.e@., he spoke when he was asked. gomethings
He hed only 2 dritiks end -he tokk sore food with them. He was. interes sed
in leaving on tine which was pleasent news ‘to. me.

_ Uke... 08 the way to: hia
. death of x6 Sov Generals in
a publistzed Purge c

a _ will start returning ‘trom Czechoslovakia and their, stories would be
: _ the opposite fret ta the. goveranent used as excuse for invading Czecho.

we ; _. BiPernald. .....



--- Page 54 ---
Te eae a ene te anaes Meet eer neelind oe eens

ne mats | pov May 15, 1969.
. : pipader fae
Gurnover.Report.. pngrao” oe
Subject: LIOVAL-2 9 ~ e-
Date of Meet: Hoy. 13

ca way. B ‘at 1930
oa LIOVAL~ s e Lone.
outline for ture Handling of LIOVAL~2. At 2030 bre’ So ‘and ? met with
LIOVAL-1 at HOYO 19: restaurant where in the course of a fiereralt dinner ,
the turnover was. ‘effected.

» Next. F - Tet meet: May 21 at. 1330 bre at the sene restaurant.

Comes:

. bb L-1 can be: reached “auring woeking ays, on phone a
23~09-34. from 0800-1 10: hrs at bis sekools on phone . .

‘ home froin: 1600-1700 nee.
‘ te cat use the. extention 810. to eave & a messsge. for,

7 personal neeta end ‘other " operations) activity.

: be Oa: their next meet a new meet sight will be selected.

. , ce. ‘For, interne] use only:- .G instructed F that with regerd
: to whet can be said to I-k there was no use ‘of setting
into the security for the sake of security: if it
would serve any useful purpose of telling I-1 that

7, ee cd Pa



--- Page 55 ---
14-0000

Cee,

= 2s :

+

we recruited LIBACON-1, thea he should be. told.about ite

peo, 4 Admia & Finahees:

o IL considers 1¢ probable that he owes LIBACOY=1
‘paynent for Reveral: léeséons. He will oecertain the.

a, smount and FP will pay it on the next meet. :

> ¢ infoed- L-}'@bout the status of the-order'of a Polbea

“and was tild that when it come F- Will deliver At tot

— ‘With regerd to” ops “expec es former agreement. renieing
| in Power. *

Se gperational: :
- 7 : : e. L-L reported on LIRACON-Yo_ statements to hin about”
: LOGINOY. on May 2 (reported separately). This: provided
8 taylor made openening for operational Sirectives, :

i I-l will ebntinuée his ‘contact with LIBACOH-1 through ~
ledguage clasees, becatise LIBACON-1_ ‘is still a Person
of interdst to usy. a a

| 6. We feceived fom othey sources info that: LOGINOY would. |.
‘Leave POs in: duly. In view of the fact thet Sov IS : a
‘officers are judged. home by the. mecanical computa tion:

. ef their. activity abroad, our experience shows that —

good autber of then try to entelish their Fecord

o.
ee.

°

: contadis and asking ‘Feerui tment attempts.
with. di sfegara for security rales and ‘sound opera tions”

-
he
i

falis By this. éategory of Sov is ° ricers without

trying ‘to deteraine whether LIRACON-18. statecents to .
; IRI. may be an additional indication to that effect, |
Be far as we know LOGINOV it would be in line with |

his recent behavior if he approached I-1. - : '

@.. If I-1 is approached by LOGINOY or another Sov officiel :
he will act friendly and speak about his frienehip
with Pavel YATSKOY. L-1 will make a renark to the
effect that PY failed to keep his promise and send him

HE aE ME isha PEL AT


--- Page 56 ---
Ne a i tn ec lnn ae te a a ommend ate ana oe nett ene tie mse rma ti h S

~ .
. L -

-3-

his Moscow address, |

e.. If LOGINOV, or whoever it may be, disclains knowledge
about L-1 - YATSROY friendly relation, L<1 will speak
in terms that. this fact ought to be a common knowledge
in the. Sov Enbassy. : :

f. If the” person making - the appreach accuses Ind for —_
trying to buy y Sov official (PY), L-2 pr d
the approaches ‘ts ‘grossly nistéken: and ili open | a

», batrage of questions to determing what was known
‘here about the PY case, If the correot sum involved
in thet case is rentioned, or place the pitch was made
or other detail(s) indicating that. the approacher is
cognisant of this specific case, bel will politely
ask what. the approscher wanted from him-and will not -
hesitate” ‘to tell hia that. “the: same offer applies to
the appreacher, . .

ge. If LOGINov nakes the approach under the pretext oft”
. wishing to raintain friendly relation with L-1 and -
no 1 | admite knowing PY and having heard about Pys friend- = +
bo mo, ship with E-1 he will be treated friendly and L-1 . “
will invite him to a ‘dinner and let-him- talk. Ia
: eich ‘@ case it would be obvious that LOGINoY would .
want. te pass ir} to souebody elses.

ONE Ae lt EE BEE, Def:

he wili ‘stick se his guns of being an American patriot.
and will tura hin down: by: ‘stating that’ he was able
to. arake a better offer. te the’ ‘Recruiters: Lo

uPerned

Tae NATED OMNI E Rb ER NE PR RSE CE ih ot



--- Page 57 ---
14-0000 co : :

4
ATTACHMENT to TURNOVER -Repors
kay My 1969, oo . al

‘sie 1 LOGINOV Gn, 72) eae

_Sourcer L 10)

- Qe, - oti May 2 Rafael gave. a “Languare. Lesson to LTOVALSL and on:

” that ocoaeton he stated that LOCINOY had taken. Juan luir, Direotor
of the language school on Tiber, for a day of having fun, It wae not
olear whether Juan Luis and LOGINOV hed B night. on the town « or they
went out of town “for a whole day "to have some fun". .

2.0 Refael told bel. that he aid not. “andérstand such. an attitude...
of 106, NOV, “hagause he coneidered: “LOGINOV ‘to be. a food friend’ of hie:
he wae. eurprized that ‘LOGINOY did ‘not invite ‘nin together with Juan Tuie,
_in fact, he sould not explain to hineelt how: vponething Like that could |

happen. .
3. Rateet “went speaking about LOGINOY for rome time about how
~ good he ie basically ag a mens how Pleasant companion he ie and what :

a good friend he is. + Lee

anperaee oe ee : : hey ;
Sete rear erate nine ee ite ieee de te

aaa i

Se Ink believed that Refaels pride waa hurt dion: by ‘the fact that.
LOGINOY. ignored him, enpe of lly, when. there war a change of having sone.
fun. Therefore, L-l told. Rafeel that it wae posrible that. LOGINOY. wanted -
to invite hin too, but was not able to reach hic by. phone, which. “would
not be unusual in view of the fact that Rafaol is praotically n never .

home. = « .
6. On thie same occasion Kefael asked LIOVAL-1 aif he would be
. ‘ .
kind to pay him the lessons whick he owed him, In view of the irregularity
of Rafaels appearances to give lessone L-l war not certain whether he
owed anything or not, xafael corroborated his request by stating that

a a ae


--- Page 58 ---
er 2

-2- |
:

i bie wife writes down every prymont Pafnel. receiver end the book. ehows
that no payment wap received rince Jan or. Peb 27 (RNP doee not reneniber
which month was mentioned). Lel atated that 4f it. 80, then, Rafeel met
de right. Recauee he was short ‘of cagh ‘he paid hia Mi 150.= and stated.
that he would pay remainder the next. time, 1.6. the next lesson,

_ Which wag scheduled for waa kay 7 at 1700 bro. (NOTE: Rafael had

8 meet with RHP on ‘the saae day at 1620: bra, . and it wae hin’ to. pik: up.

: this day ane time. Rafeel: came to thie weet on time yen :

Te fhe fact that Rafsel did not ehow up for the Lesson wae no
surpriee to Lel.. Nevertheless, about 1830 Rofaele wife phoned to L-l-

‘and asked to epeak to her husband. then Ie} atated that he wae not there

she commented that he waa supposed to be there at 1800 hra. About: ‘an
hour later she called again and I~1 had to! ‘atate that ho dia nat ‘come
at all. Shen, rhe requested. I=2 to. give to. Rafael the _aweater of her .
da. ighter whieh wae accidently left at L-le place. Of courre nothing hap-
‘pened, but einée thet Boment IL-1 did not hear from Rafael nor hie wife.
L-1. pointed out that thia wae unusual, beoauee cod Rafael akippe a leseca
hé calle the. fiext. day and never leter than “the third ‘day ‘to apologige.~
Further, tho sweeter which Rafael war to pick up from Il, according to.
_ the wifes atatenent, wae a. part of their daughters kind: parden uniform,
“Lel concluded that he waa inowlinea to teitere that Rafae) got angry. with
‘him or becduee he question d the correctnoge of thé claim for payment
} oF ‘because he ‘placed hin ‘on rt by felling. hte. mite thet he dtd noe
' show up at I-Ie. place. oa a
8. , L«1 wae told not to take the nator. 80 , sertouely since there ”
was still a chance that Rafael and bis’ ‘wife ‘were ona war path aad they’
had no tine for any thing elee. Iel was requested to try, to contact Rafael
or hie wife ae soon ae popsible, Le-1 coneiderad ‘that May 15 (Teachers. Day).
would be the deat time to do it and there was no objection on hie choice
of date eines it offeree a detter chance of . ‘finding. Rafael home.

9. IL-l wan also requested to bring to Rafael attontion that the
irregularity of lesnone ieoconvenienta him quite bit on. one hand ond on
the other kafasl loseo the BONCYoeeccces

akeut TOITNOY dase nat mean that anvthine hannened recantiy, etill calla

1

10, ' Coszment by Riv: The fact that Le] pointed out that Hafael> talking


--- Page 59 ---
eRe A mee emcee ob ace Lee te! eee, ae ane ene Riemann Fe

: _ ae 12 May 1959

MEYORANDUY FOR: lr. Nathan Ly Ferris _ ; _
_ : Legal Attache - ee Ts

how: cg Winston ue ‘Seott.
SUBJECT. = CHEN (thu)-

ade to your memoranda dated 18. Jann ry
1968 and. 25 April 1969;: Reference is also nado te pur nonorandum
dated 29 January 1968, #12,525, : wlle eke

"2. In ordor to assist you ta the lavestigation
“ux by your Headquarters, attached horewit ‘for yo éntion are
two copies each of those handwriting specinons available on porsons’
‘assigned to tho Gt: Eabassy £ in December 1967, |
There are no fi I it specinens available, Listed bolow are.
the names of those Soviets whose handwriting specinons are being

forwarded herewith, |

Be Nikolay Ivanovich KUZNETSOV, , Beployes (a Representative) ._
Soviet Corinercial Office. Possibly’ Kes) eG

- by Nikolay: Eergoyevich- LEOQNOV, was Second: Seeretary,
Press Attache at the Soviet Teaeee Known GB, Departed’ Pcs
‘Decenber: 1968... : :

Ge Valontin Sergéyevicn LesttioN,: third Soertatys coma 7
‘Soviet Eabassy. Kiowa Kea. .

eS 4. Yastity Btep ovich MIRO:
: Soviet Enbassy, Known: ‘KGB.

ee. Boris Nikolayévich vosK BOYN FKOV,_
Cultural “Attache, ‘Boviot’ Enbassy.-' Probably.

ft. Revel ‘Antonovich YATSEOY, was Second Secretary, Soviet
Rnbassy. Known KGB: Departed PCS 6 December 1967.

; 3, There is no other information available locally on Subject
case,

Attachnent; h/e SECRET

se ', wis s Eaphoyoe (cnautteur),
Soptenber 4908, .

cond Secretary,

*. : aed

#13,776 fi bene



--- Page 60 ---
ie eet ra et nie M aL mt EU a a Casa nd LS tan asa ddte nie mae
FN ne me nee .
; siti)
:

TION Is FROIA CONFIDENTIAL “sour CE, IT MUST -NOT-
Dn WOLS on FU PART. ours TDs Youn OFFICE WITH

P-2250 watt ‘already tn file
885 w/att already in file

50~2-4/A w/o att ts . :
Memo chrono w/o: att : a
Headquarters pouch (return to FARMILANT) a an

Meera ET ae



--- Page 61 ---
14-0000

b\

i
i
“4  tife at Cuautla and as te was enetring the pool area LOSISC7 vas ‘Teaving.
|
i
i
t
i
}
:

i
i
H
i

a “group a dey vefore Dubeek mas kicked. Gute...)

{| ce Re teachers of Spanish at tae Sov ES 0% sher ‘then his mo thee

) Si. ya a
re $3) Se - ef Ljras, yl 62

Wide al) : .

LIBACOH-1 ee a So ,
Briefs on Keet Held May 7 frox 1679 to 2035 bre. . ee

oan . . . . . . i
Shen ceme I asked till what hour ke can te with me. He said 1930...
| &t 1815 T- paid the bill, but he insisted that ve stey a little longer -
. and. for . the the reft he would pay the vill: he hei 2 9é¢: itionsl aniaks .
ot _ Maile I hed ny third éoffee and a drink. / :
po : as we! got together he tot& tie thet he was. on May 3 vith his

IOG cornered Lia for ea 15 cinutes talk rhich consisted of pregsu: 2$ng

EIBACON into making § song arrsnserents thas B&G vould be atle to neet

LIGVAL-1. Then LISASCY varecd bin. dowa LOS insisted that they have a lunch
Jon Taur. Ley 8 at the restaurant 7 Zl Ferre Andaluse ( or siniler av at
accepted.

the: Copenkagen. abeut 1233 re. - LIRACC.
“LIBACCE brought zea bio sxetch'on LOGIT , rhich Hes af
interesting paper. Te ‘Siscussed the paper sHick énabled eto obtain.
explanations and facts on which LIBACON based his gracral stetenentes -

LIBACON readi ily save me info on Frof. LO DUBAY, ‘Shere was*
not much,” but sufficient to ascertain that he did not attenst $C, ,
withhold iafo. frosi us. CTL bres feat ~ elas eS eae jraskat)
=1 Ztho is presently.
, was in Spee with the

Ob Be also- gave’ né ‘sone info on X
_ conducting @ tour of Hexicans throv

LIBASON did not Know anything but, proviced to aak bis mother on sat

‘when she wilh Be at his Rone. . . :

Fo. It took. me ‘sone tine. to explain to. IRAs: shat: attitade to
“take tovard. LOt during the lunch, . :
. Detailed report will be prepared. How
netdizg in notes on xy iastruction to LIBacdy coaceraing hew to
“handle the lunch with 106. Also handed in is the 3io sxeten on LO.

Bus a6

weer .

~-" Guaiquaer sugar Qonuy varssy mouse mm owe

a pele


--- Page 62 ---
\ oo ATTACHMENT
Hay 8, 1969

Valentin LOCIKOY (?-11,712) : -
: Sourees LIRACOR=2 (P=4805)

ne ee

Le. ‘0a: Kay 3. Source went with hie ‘tentiy. to Cuautle to pénd a a
day ‘out of town. ‘Shere, ae he arrived ‘he Suaped Anto LOsIboy who was
leaving. They talke 15 niautes. : .

2. ” Besrnov: -anked Source’ wag "he- atilL. eivirig rainiuage lessone. %o
that American (LIOVAL+1). Ae Source anewered afirmatively LOG told Source i
that he vould like to meet LIOVAL-1. SOURCE .atated. that LIOVAL was not
only a student who- pays hie leseons but was also a. 00d friend of Source.

. Then LOGINOV became’ quite blunt snd agressive : he outright. demanded that -
LIBACON introduce hin to LIOVAL~ LIBACON tried. to reason out. with LOGINOV.

:} that. by meeting LIOVAL he would: achieve nothing because LIOVAL wae |

a good fanily man, 6 peregon conscious of hie responsibility for ‘4 ‘ohfldren, .
liberal in hie way of thinking but definitely a Patriot. and & pereon:
who ie attached: to hie way of life and could not care lees about Soctaltien.
LOGINO¥ then inctsted that he and. LIRACON have. 4 lunch together "next"
week to talk this. tatter over. LIBACOH agreed to lunch with hin on May 8.

' j.e@., a day after he neets. with me... oo

‘ 3s Lo BIBACOH ‘told me that ‘he woula atiok to ire) guna and refuse’
LOGINOVe request to. introduce! hin to LIOvAL. Oni = of special réaso for’
doing 0, in addition to his des: re of not getting involved. ‘with that
| gang. (ken), woe th it he considered LIOVAL to te a. friend. of tiie and.
L would not want to ‘do anything which: eould: make ‘rovat suspect that LIBACON
° wae a kop ool : :

4 ‘than the fact ‘eat LIOVAL existe ra know nothing about aim,
‘but the sole. fact ‘that he is an agent of our forced me to aseune that -

he wae pickea up for a .&008- reaton end that we murt have en objective for
holding hin, Therefore, I felt that it would not be wire to let LIBACOY
ebut the door to a poribility ( tum as much rerote as it cay be ) that” :
we counted on the porr ibility that LIOVAL te approached oresntacted by

a Sov official, Purther, I kept in sind that we would act. want LIBACON. to
alip into a double arent role. wherefore, T tnetrueted LIRADON:

:
i
i



--- Page 63 ---
1490000, a

as

" aeke hip eome thing imporsible. (try to get L&G to
_ do. explanaing). .
-Repéat deecriptton: of LIOVAN es: persous2aty ag be. aid “

“fn ‘Cuautla and 6
“Dy. meeting ‘LIOVALS Et ia: antlei pated that LOGE

ee

°

da.

“LIRACON will inrists that he does not want to get

; plan, if LOGIYOY hed one, by which LIOVAL would be

-~2-

He wirhes to be on friendly terms with LOGINOV, but
certainly it ie not.a friendly attitude af LOGO

what can LOCINOV possibly.

may be brief and say that thie would be his ‘problea
and that all EILZED LIBACON had to do is to arrenge
for an introduction.

itivolved. "in that kind of businese", especially, -
because it’ ‘was clear to him that even if LOGINOV.
achieves nothing, he lost nothing, but LIBACON ia

@ gure lozer because hie would lose a. friend ‘and ~
poreibly get tagged as a Sov spy.

If LOGLUOY éces not break ‘off his ineteting. at thie
point, LIBACON will stata that he would agree on a |

in LIBACCNS ‘company, but no introduction of LOGIZOv

' ae a friend of LIBACON would be made. We pleyed it

back and fo th discussing. various _poosibilities, but*

‘dmportant: was that LOGINOY ehould come up. with a.
plan. and : LIOVAL be fiven a possibility of” aaying

ta LDACON that he aid not want to come.

after the, lunch LIBACON will go to his inetitute
end I mould. phone hin there to find out ‘at which point
the conv with, Lec Ho ENDED.:



--- Page 64 ---
es an ATTACHENT |
May 8, 1969.

. (P=11,722)
subjects Postponsent of Valentin LOGIROY | ~ LIBACON-1 Lunch.

; “Sources LIRACOH=1 i (24805),

de _ In /agcordance with the presrréngeneiits I phcined to LTRAOOH. ¥
to the language inetitute at 1455 tre to hear how aaa the scheduled
lunch go. -

2. LIBACON-1 stated that a. yu student of his postponed his:
lesson for a half of an hour ani that he phoned to LOGINOV to come

to the reetaurant they were to lunch about. 45. minutes later than they
- had agreed to meet there. LOGINOV told LIBACON that in that case he

_ prefered ‘to “postpone the lunch to the beginning of. “the nest week and.
: that LOGINOY would phone to ‘LIBACCN-1 to eet the date ana tine.

3 ; Aocording to: LIRACON=1, LOGINOY eoundad friendly on the phone:


--- Page 65 ---
> cl neahaeerhonetaaceteneaiarel So madd hee ae ek lac CARE Sel a inden een Bee TH

° aos . ~
: t
: ‘ 4
: Valentin LCGINOV
Fisicamente

de eonplexién atletica,, alto. Juega muy bi¢n ‘al tenis, Recientemente

, quedo en Segundo lugar en- el campeon: to del: DF, que tuvo lugar

en el cid Erangia, donde ractica este: ‘deporte. ‘Guida. muchtsisio :
Ba este sentido:

a

€ .

} :

{ Edad. aproximada de 43-45 afios, “Aunque aparenta menos,

su coudicxon fisica y mas jue. nada gu apariencia,
. Muy pocos amigos ‘saben’ que tiene’ ‘una hija de.

es. muy yanidoso.

16-17 aiios, Cuando le preguatan $i tiene hijos hable solo de su.

hijo de 11 afios de edad. ‘Le da pena presentar a su mujer, que es” le
let

muy amable y buena, porque se vé de mis edad. que er, No fuma, toma
“2 wAsyte

. “muy. poe 2 aunque cuands Ja ocasion requiere de tomar mucho agtcentx

y sienpre. se ‘le ive Seréno, ‘Es inuy anable en. et trate,” Nunca - trate

_de imponer sus ideas, pero: “ gienpré pendiente de convencer ‘por ‘las

“buenas a ‘sus contrincantées. Cuando" ve que no. puede hacer lo altimo,
ee

ronpe diplonaticamente les relaciones amistosas con el ‘sujeto.
‘solo. cuenta lo Union

Ea sus idgas’ es de la escuela estalinista:

‘Sovietica y la attima “Linea a seguir del Partido. Eso quiere decir

que. no tiene. ideas propias, Sigue, tideltsimanente ‘la "ifnea" porque.

“sabe nuy bien. que es da, a ica forma Fapida. ¥ eficaz de escalar ef,

su carrera, Le gusta huchisino: ‘a vida buena, tipo, océidental,

aunque antes se dojaria ‘cortar ‘un. ‘braze: qué contesarselo asi. nisio. .

Bs muy admbicioso y se ve que tiene problenas ‘con sus compatieros ‘de

trabajo. “Hable despectivamenta-de ‘ellos, No ‘Ye gusta nada la idéa

de tener que permanecer on Mosed los dos afios que vienen, Am dijo

que harfa lo posible que al transcurrir esos afios lo mandaran de
preferercia otra vez a México, Su ilusioa ads grande es trabajar

en Espaha, Adora a los espafioles, La’ forma’de ser de 108 mejicanos

no le gusta, Por eso ai quiere regresar, quiere decir que profiero

cualquier lugar donde vivir, menos Rusia, Creo que precisanente



--- Page 66 ---
Sat

'
'
}
i

oe 7 . - ‘os . - : 7 ; . :
ay SS ee ae CTO SOCIO? stag nit a.nd aN’ neta So so hints w thins at Cle im Sneek tame

se wae

porque ya tiere que (PATENT 2a. gullo, es por lo aue ultimamente esta

cometiendo crores. Quiere hacer ti¢ ‘t.2x a como de lusar, presionando

a la) gents de. ae wre que antes jamis hacta, El dia 3 de mayo Yo vi

ArwILr |
_ en Gata, !y sabieado que. yo no. quiero. trabajar para’ el, me

insistio, Tlegando- al. Lea « de preguatar si podfamos abordar a
mt alunno John, nin eapeens preguntar ‘por Ya personalidad y foraa le:

pensar de John! En 108 15 minutos que estuvimos juntos no hablo rds

que de eso. ‘Cuando yo le dijo que ya le habia dicho antes que 20

_ me gustaba esa clase de trabajo, me contesto que 62 crefa que lo

que "me pasaba es que tenia miedo. La forma mis inocente de hacerme

“piear! A cont inuacion;. me invite a ‘comer ol dia 8 para, Seguir
hablando de lo misno! En el fondo creo que. todo eso revela cierta

7 ! _inocencia y muchas ganas de progresar, para lievar una vida muy

diferente a lo que evan los ciudadanos govieticos. ‘Créo: ‘que

i?
, i quiere dejar una grand impresion a sus jéfes para no quedar trabajando.
5 indefinidaneate en el ‘Mintsterio de: ‘Relagiones Exteriores ¢e Nosed.

Y 8 $ anbictones puedai

‘tneluse ° ‘por ‘medio de- atropellar vas se imas.. €oino persona’ 'y e condiciones

7 _ ‘normales me parece: bueno, generoso y ftel amigo. Sin enibargo la’

oe on. | . ‘verdad es que funea To. Liegué. a. conocer muy bien, en parte postbleneate
“porque: east. desde. el principio sentia. instintivanente que queria a

_ algo-de mt, vmuy aparte de nuestra anistad 'y-en parte porque con todo

y la confianza que llego a teser conmigo Jands ge descubrio ‘por

completo, ai mucho nenos, Es oxtrentadamente caliteleso:
Refuniendo; Hi inpresion es que es una buena persona, de buencs

Bentimiontos, pero que una vez metida en "ese trabajo,” por razones

Que desconocenes, hace todo lo posible por destacas,



--- Page 67 ---
eee ere ne Sem ae ne ae

Fe ee ne mentee meee eaters ee ee ee etn Hearne a Cane ene ee am

..
os

ae

CONTACT REPOST = q.
_ SURJECT— - ““g ° RESABSR (P-8777)
DATE OF MEETING : 10 April 1969

1. In response to BESABER's phone call, I met him at

oor Ags: hotel room in the Aristos from 1430 until 1545. ‘Next.

" meéting will be on Tuesday evening, 15 ‘April at hone.
2, Subject “had nothing new to report. on contacts vith |

| Se BENOXers,. but said that he is now raring to ge oa any require=
“ments I might levy. He said that all of his financial problems -

are now solved (as I surnised they wuld). Essentially, he has

“gold 50% of his business (1NZA) to @ syndicate-group that. 1s

paying oft - Subject ts detts. They will construct a bis new, -

cine vine ne

factory complex. in Cuernavaca vo bring all of Subjects -
manufacturing enterprises under ote roof and double capacity.”
They're also going to. open up offices and a showroom on Insur-
gentes sur. Subject” figures. ke will probably stay active: ~for
_ a couple of years: fore and then sell his emaining 50% for

about: a hale million dollars. - . : .
33 y told Subject again’ “that! I an’ “now anxious, for hia

to establish a social: relationship with -SPYRA (Pp-6601) and. .

‘that: Tam no longer interested in. his developing HAICHCHRZAK

per se. I ‘suggested that he: night use Ad. sincly ag an entree
. te meting SPYRA, ostensibly to work out: ‘a cultural progran | of

Ente anand ao mnneenn lettin See namie .
i
1

Subject's grandfather’ s music as ‘mentioned previously. Subject

3
de

i
:
a

said ttt he would get on it right away and would try to call
_the Ambassador on Tuasday when Subject Is ba& in town.

fet tRE779

ee: P66 ee:


--- Page 68 ---
a Diam ee een et ot oe ern me eter mtn me me oo Cre et eae atone ot cm aie = comm mamma

- + ~~ —,

4. TI also asked Subject to get t beck in toch with
\ Boris CHAYKOV (P-6235) and Valentin LOGINOV (P-11,712) to
warn up the relationship. I pointed out that we should be.

, prepared to have Subject ia a@ position to give then gifts in

tthe event Head-uarters approves ‘the plan to bug soxe of Oo H
- ‘ Subject's Trojan horses, Unless therd. is some reasonably good .
contact established: ‘in advance, his’ presont ing gifts will. oe : od
appear too contrived. Subject agreed. and said that he would ~ ;

' ‘give them a phone call soon to try to get together for: drinks.
Judging from past history, CHAYKOV will be ready to see Subject
- |
i

for a night on the town in August.

"$4 I paid Subject - $3000 (MN) constdtuting . half of his
retainer for three. months (Jan., Feb. ard March) and agreed to
have’ the balance of. $3000 for him on Tuesday. ‘He gave ne a” ,
pile of hotel bills and other expenses which will be charged
against the "$3000 revolving fund he has outstanding. He asked
me if I could get him a case of champagne; a. col. ple of bottles.
of cognac, a bottle of gin. I told him that I'd ‘see at these"

are available ‘and that, i£ they are, I would charge them against,
either his salary or fund rather than. as outright gifts as in

the. past.

PPPOE LIB TC HRC AE SUE: che

 ‘Maothy M, ARCHBOLD:

,
2 sttnsaegertary
i}


--- Page 69 ---
v

SUBJECT: valentin ,Loguinov
DATE OF INFORMATION: 30 March 1969. 1155-1157 hours.

PLACE ACQUIRED: Tennis courts of the French Club
REPORT. BY: John Francis

r white ta king to Mache P 1,
as aie courts away from | me I finished ‘playing. with:
r In't see walk: jer to:

I shouted loudly to a ball-boy ‘to find my favorite .
trainer. Val dashed over to cay he would like to plays

Excuse for missed luohb. I "What happened to our ~ un

~ luncheon date", asked with no smile. Val said that . : a
: Dimi had. been bitten padly by a dog. I told Val that

I. had already heard that story and that Dimi had been.
bitten néarly a week before our date. Onée again I -
did not. smile a gavé him little ooporltunity for

a gradious acceptance of a poor ¢ cuses It. was clear

. that I) was annoyed. I could see from val's expression
that he was embarrassed and off-balance. He has a pecu=
liar facial expression when he has Been pvt at a- dis— .
advantage. . .

: val admitted. that the bite had been much fanaa

but he. € inf:

_and he Ke: 3 om
he had one of the: ler Bandaids on his ari. He

: seemed to be! having | no. discomfort.

“es ‘I accepted vai's excuse actly. ;

as ede Unfortunstely wal won 6~3,. 6-1... I -

renin” you that I switched to my left arm nome time

ago and am still at a disadvantage. I still apologize

for letting the barbarian-wi I-had to leave at —

1145. Immedfataly threoother men. invited Val to make -

a fourth for doubles. I had hoped to talk to him when ©
- we finished. : . .

Conversation, I finally ‘pad to interupt Val while” . :
the men wero still “warming up and. take him to a corner . t
of the court. . ae

I told vat that f had honed to tell him something . i
et the lunch and on veveral other oecasions bet was
Alwoya interupted, Kow 1 wanted to tall him what I
had in mind, I wanted him ¢o understand that his : i
nolitieal jokes nad emurrasued ma. That fF dtd not :
want to create a scene and had never commented on
then. Hut J would not tolerate them in Che Cutures


--- Page 70 ---
T satd that his offer to aive me money to work for
his government had entarrassed me in front of our mutual
friends, Further, ry colite refusal to make an issue of
his approach could have been intorpretéd as tacit accep=
kaace of his offer to pay me for treaon against my
“COURETYs :

Yal- interrupted and. said it was all a joke and
that he thought I apereciated that it was nothing
more. than a Jokes : :

‘said I.

: gould. be jeopardized if someone thought. we. were 2 Fertoua, :

I told val that in any case, ‘JoRing or not, I di
_not discuss politics or- religion with ay friends, mat 8

te ticularly here- in Hexico.

“He acted very surprised and amused. .

so I pointed out that I consider myself a guest in b
a very hospitalbe but foreign country. “These people |
are-my hosts. You are a diplomat. You can, you mist
disouss ‘polfties. It is your job. I carinot. Ir actually

" ami not interested in politics. I am Aot x
in politics. But if you must talk politics with me,_
let us go Sone where in private, without an audiénce.
“If you want to diseiss business, fine! I know that ©;
‘subject and I - like it, and I am even better with an P:
audience, particularly Mexicanl

val had his transparently disturbed, distressed
. and disadvantaged look. He promised never to discusa
-politics. with me again. He: apologized. Re ania. he
. understéod what i meante:

P—— Hint» ~ me, Tee Boos



--- Page 71 ---
SUBJECT: Gloria Pinto
D\TE OF INFORMATION: 26 March 1969. 1306-1355 hours.

PLACE ACQUIRED Office of John Francis |
REPORT BY: John Francis

J
Telephone ‘gall to mvoffice. Gloria called to say -
‘troubie finding clients for. my
bug Be: she asked’ when she could see me. I suggested —
immediately and she arrived’ about one: ‘hour later.

good- Mexican: shat in ch tei ig g)
\ to the matter about which the meeting was called,

Meche iand San Luis Fotosia I asked Gloria if:
She ware going to San Duis Potosi this year for the
Holy Week tennis tournaments. She said that she had S
planned to do so but was unable to find some one to co
_ go with her. at the last moment. Pepe did not want to * _
go, and world not let her go by herself unless accom
panied by several ther women or by Meche..Meche re-~ ~
fused to. go’ saying :shé would have no fun if with her .
_mother and planned to gé to Corpus Cheistt by her= 7 an
self, . : : -

- Pepe to, Euro: eo add Ne Gloria “volunteered that’

she was Annoyed with Fepé. She deplores his Jatin:
attitude about the double standards She has been
prohibktted to take several brief trips to various
cities in ‘Mexico to see friends and family. she is

not. wel Lcoma to agcomi ny Pepe ‘on his trips. Yet he.

will 86 nth off to travel either

 €0. Eur @ or. to “South. dAmetica. Gloria said that she

has been waiting: all these years. for her children to
grow up so that she cpuld go with Pepe on his trips.

Now that. atiey are. grown up, she finds” ehat she still “4
is expectedé - -to stay home, . : _

. _ : Gloria watched carefully. ‘Gloria ‘must account for.
: “her. time very carefully to .Pese during. the day. And

: under no- circumstances ‘ean. she stay out after darks
Fepe apparently. aisapproves.of Gloria working for mee
He does not like the idea that she will be visiting
businessmen throughout the city both in their offices
and homes. He has expressed his disapproval, but :
‘Gloria has chosen to ignore it.

Wants. to sand “Meghe_to U.S. Gloria wants to fiant
the attitude of suneriority over women that Latin men
have, but on behalf of her daughter, not herself. Goria
feela that she will never be able to enjoy anything -
close to equal-treatment and consideration with Pepe.
But she feela that her dauchter should escape from
this Latin Moaradation. Tro or three years working

in tew York Francisco is Gloria's droam for
Heche Co
Weeds «fe kod I / cy _ 132. 2 3

s .


--- Page 72 ---
14-0000

7a

. No _Jnek with business. Gloria seems very enthu=- |
i : - gdastic about working for me. Hot so much to help mo,
a but to aive herself an excuse to get out and do soma~? i
things Further, she wants to determine whether she .
ean actually do something other than raise children.
. She was married when very young and has nover worked.
., She hopes.-eventually to start some business of her owne
“. .. (she probably wants to have a shopr of some Kind. :
—" ’ Working for me is a trial for“herself. she hopes to |
“rit prove to herself: that shé ‘can- succeed in business and
“meeting peoples Com _

. Tha approach she has beén taking with my business.
- nas been_unsaccessful so far. I have given her the one ©
4 which is most time-consuming and’ one which I would not
have been able to do by my self, There are other apporaches,

but I have not outlined these to her as yete

We discussed her aporoach and some modifications
Oo Of dite We agreed to review her sales approach after.
-3 : the Holy Week and decide whether to proceed along

different lines. . : .
fe tiness  poéined . O-1 DI
on Discussion of « Having completed .our -business:~»
“_ raised the matter of Val. I reminded her. that I had. |
explained to. her some time age that I was annoyed with’
Val's treatment of mé in public, nemely his flagrant
‘attempts to recruit mé in the presence of mutual friends...
ft told her tha € I still hadn't had a chance to talk to.
val in private. I reseated that ali I wanted to do was
make it clear to him that I held him in great esteem as
_a person, valued his friendshin,.was not interested in
assisting ‘his government, and wanted him to stop jeo-
pardizing our ‘fttendship with his offensive approaches,

whether subtle. and implied or direct, and coarse.

se aes Fos -E told Gloria that I had planned. to have lunch” :
we . -with val ‘today. I enjoy Vval's companys rarely have ae.
wo chance to chat quitelys don't like to eat luoch by Soc
: : myself) and looked forward to explaining to Val my.
position before hé coripletely destroyed any chance

. for us to contifiue as friends.

Not aware of accident to Dmitri, I told Gloria .-
that Val Rad éxcused Himself from our ‘lunch date due: -
to an accident to his son. She did not know of any , .
accident other than the dog bite the previous weék. — :

Gloria said that hie declining my invitation -
might have been an afterthought. That he did not want
to hurt my hy being seen with me in a public place.



--- Page 73 ---
14-0000

7

Avoids "hurting" his friends. Gloria then told me
that Val never accepted an invitation to have coffea with
her or Fene or to dine out. He explained to her ‘that at

could hurt her to ba seen with him, She gave an example
of when she was “invited” to the ballet with val and. a-—~
group of friends. , :

: After the ballet, Peve and Gloria invited Val to ~
join them for dinner. val declined. Pepe and Gloria.-
went to the Hoyo 19. Shortly after they. arrived, Val
and. a, laraé number _of embassy officers also arrived. —
Val steered them away from Pepe and Gloria. Shortly ~~
afterwards arrived, sat at a remote table. and

. took notes wi watching the Soviets. ~ :

1° Val works. mornings only. Gloria mentioned that
. Val 4s in the embassy only in the morning. This was |
in response to my statement that I had tried to. call
the embassy and talk to Val to find out what had hap-
pened to Dmitri, but since he was out, I would call
dn the afternoon. She added that he of course works
-4n the afternoon, but outside the embassy. I said “try-
ing to bey gringos", She said- "trying to convince :
_Mexiedns"s 20s DO meee eens seers ea

. COMMENTS - 7 BP. eS . é
; It seems to me highly unlikely that val is .

really concerned about the welfare of his friends .
seen with him. It seems quite clear that he con-
siders Gloria and Pepe, and perhaps me, as potential ©
assets. He does net want to be seen with us because =;
‘we ‘would lese our value to hiing He told Gloria that

they should Gohfine their contacts to the French

- Club, ‘This’ seems to confirm the suspicion that. he
believes that thés-is a secure’ place to iieet people

It 4s possible that he checked with his colleaques” ~~

arid they were of the opinion that my choice of the =;
Llave'de Oro for lunch was too public, exposed. us +,

to too many Ameficans. © ~ os ry . ce
a I feel that Gloria has served a very useful

purpose in this matter. Ff she 1s working for val,

which I doubt, she is in a position to séo that my
business is indeed legitimate, time-consuming, and

with considerable financial potential. . Further,

she is in a position to relay to val my unwillingness

to cooperate with him and his governemtn and my threat
to-take the matter to the embassy if his harrassment ©
continues. , : :



--- Page 74 ---
14-0000

si -* = oy
i “et . . fo ha : H
, 26 March 1969 ; '
t : s j’. pee, t
: costact REWST ade : Lo sue i
: ‘ «| 4 i ewido

FROX  t Samuel J, KARTASUK 0 alee r- ole %

SUBJECT : Rafeel VIDIFLLA Ruie . l oat rou 5

1 A neeting was held from 1300 to 15, 25: March 1969 in the

Chalupes Resturant located on Reforms, one block Fast, of Predo Korte

~ Next meeting is scheduled. for 1630, 26 arch i969 at vaes Restourent

on the: Periferico, North of Fjercito: Nacional.’

2 I perked ry car three dlocks - from the neeting site and arrived

4n the area at 1255. Subject. wes already serted ote teble waiting, Wo had
lunch and remained there talking until 1s, te mentioned how much ho apprectated|
the teo books (in Russian) which I looned him ahd said thet he was noarly
’ through with the lest one, He said he would tura them over to VICTOR, (T
had alresdy inforned him-that he ‘would be: necting a man “homed vieTaR during!
Re asked ‘if we could obtein for hin the three other books

= ay absence),
vritten: by the seme author who wrate "Cancer ward", He said téencer * ard" was
“the ‘second “dook weitten by the suthor. The lst book was "First Circle, the

2nd was Cancer Ward, the 3rd was “vans, dat tap last wes wkaster |

Ke commented on hoy favorably impressed be was by the éna book, 1 said I

A

would give VICTOR this information and J thought we could Probebly turn up

«

; with some of then,
“2, INFORMATION CONCERNING Locinov (P-21, Aa):
; . Subject said that he hes not. (definitely) talked to ‘Wegltoy in over.
j two months, de thought dt very strenge thet LOGINOV hes not cated hin at All,
; , ‘ At the last meeting with Loginov, LPGINOV told Subject that he was poing beck

to Russis in July 1969, and that he would renin there for at least tro (2)

Lociyov seid ‘thet he would probably then go to sore other country bit

,

; \ years,
i \ hed no idea where, Subject aia not call LOGINOV and invite hin ta PN: WAS i
\

party on 1 Xerch,



--- Page 75 ---
subject sadd that if LOGINGY received an dnvitetion to AXUGSS party, that it
“migat heve come from CHERNYSH (P-23,0%2), uring his conversations. with ANDRA,

she never mentioned the fact that LOGINOV went to the party, She never fold

Subject exactly who went,
a Concerning ANDREA caTano: P7413 aie \-
: "About ten days ago ANOREA went to Comnoretel Mexirana to do the weekly
_ grocery shopping. Subject dropped by her house while she wos gone. ‘Shortly
“after arriving at hor house, she called “hone ard he talked to heron -the phone. af
. She seid: that she had gone. pablens at the store ard oaked ar he covia cone
doen’ and ‘bring. sone. money. He went” with her brother, and ‘on veriving at the a

store found her in custedy ef two nan gers and 6 “Policeman, They hd caught

TREE ee gerne ae nee ne ree ements area mera

her trying to welk out with, a stolen jer of face crean (she adimited NS) and

~

_ she did not have the monéy to. pry for it. Subject talked to the nanepers, tolling
thom thet she vas just a young girl, etc,, and convinced them to-do nothing about .

: _ 4t Rafael paid for the face cream and’ they took her home. (iafrel thinks |

poo semen genes ean
,

this is a very unused side of her cherecter thst he hag never aeen before). -

ANDREA has. not nent ioned CHERNYSH to Subject since my leat renort.
Refeel said thot he. will begin to pump ANDREA for some further inform: tion (in
a discreet way), As far os he kriovs, she has not seen CHERNYSH lately, (perhaps

. since the porty ‘on 1 Harch). : 7 cuca Raz 4 \ takin (y pty 4) .
4. °° ~Concerning Rafsels MOTHER “AND HER WORK AT tat EMBASSY 1 —

"i asked Subject: xeveral questions, abént his mother, but he dodged then,
fie seemed unwil Ting to discuss her, and after saverad tries I stonped. pushing), -
Rafael ‘seid. that nie, Mother hos one particular, student in Spansion (al the inbrssy)
who hes ‘repestedly ‘expressed the desire to eet and becone friewis with Ra ‘nel,
Eis. Mother Likes the man ‘(her student) end said thet she will ahortly invite him.

hone for dinner 80 that he ond Rateel can becore acqueinted, (Rafael by noe ds

‘ouspictous of any. tnbessy official who wents to becone friends), The man 4s, °



--- Page 76 ---
Alto, ¢
ftisico muy ruso.. . :

Bipresiod de cara muy seria, pero bondadosa.. Esté solo o ea
companta, sieapre esta: pendiente de su compostira.
le preocupa suchisimo la impression que pueda causar en los de mas.
, ho, aus palabras, tratando de parecer

En la conversacion cuida suc
ingenio y sobre todo muy sencillo. Cariciendo de inteligencia sobre-
saliente, trata de explotar su supuesta sencillez e ingenuidad par:

convencer 8 los dexids de lo que dice, piensa o siente. :

figura atiétics, muy bien parectdo, Un tipo -———__-

Jamas se pone violeato on una -discusién, si no puede contestar..~ ,

‘una cara ingenuscuento triste o alegrenente sencilla, Asi jands
pierde un amigo por muy differentes opiniones o idifologia que éste

* tenga.

i

Se nota quo...

como es debido los ‘argunentos inteligentes de su interlocutor pone .-......


--- Page 77 ---
14-0000

for meeting with Valentin \
karch 24, 1999 . .

seript

_ find it very cis
saturday u
& tennis or sumbunces
re is som ning =
to cay to you, to m ar, everal veer
the only way I could be uure of having your unéividee
ateeation, in private, waz this tuners

uceks aq0, 5, at Luis Gomez! house, you otrerca
& large cum. of money 4f 7 could Rel you and vow
hassy., You made this offer in front of a numba:
mutual Eriends.

ciple interest in your -

G
by our audience as nos:

In the event that .

Rot
you héve @ it clear that IT an not
interes sted in your offer. zx nd the offer offensive and

i. sock my wife aad I like you and
Deitri. we would lixe to
ten you. Sut you are Seriously

ship.

Tam fot interested in
is your business. Well,
Iam a busi a
en So, I do

BER all “there re and alli ‘T need to.

ei 655. Any sr

40 learning rere about

timé to prepare myself
YOu Or an i

Sot
about

for solities at ais

ouseions with.

will
not



--- Page 78 ---
i
|
|
}

pol:

tics.

1.

4s

. Your owe cor

Zoviet imnertali
vour co yer
‘dtarian imperialisr--a ¢
tive than structives-a oysten
in taking ay y asd destroying what ot
Taye create

ysten far

ite States nas
6 Syste,
Gemocratic systen that. ran}

ud to yor to Go 206
the war. You Know it ‘and I know it.

SOVIET anti-senitism. The goviets, you -hy

role of support of the continued €roubled

“but is facapable of nroduciag

ony are antij-semites. Your

state in the near east. is unjustifiable ane

micanthropic.

LL. Unjustizied and enka

xii. Unjustified and exbarrass
coy . JF .

‘oy his aietnaty

near= fet ling erads 38 ia
econories an zennal pol cies. You
see everone else fail so thet you con't

So tad
SO We

you cas
it.t hsd

MEO stersce

mene ete

i

RSG ot a apetp ee ermiuNiyy nyeiape os tenpmi e gre ~

soe ee te Sewer shape ag mem pera pe sem perpen nny



--- Page 79 ---
ty | hes z0 do DU
tace of it. You are jJeooardiz ng this,
usly avoided »olitical involvement her
ch invoivement inevitable.

. & to co to embassy. If you continue to

-harrass m@, I will go to the US ambassy ana resore
your harrassment to the Security Officer. I

even ask to sea someone in the CLA. And if I
get satisfaction there, I'll go to.the Mexié
Foreign Office and tell tham my story. I'l]
i to gee that the harracs t is stopped

i propably put you on <
bs : serve no real purnos
since someone cise would si: X@ over
vour assingments,. And I consider you-a-~
rsonai friend, and wonid not want to
see you in turn harrassed by the Foreign
Sexvice or cenied try te the United
States, I would hope somd Gay you might
be assigned to line United States and
see it first hands ;

de

!
fave had very little contact
with the embassy. have very little «
confidence in Civil'servants. They ysually
aze working. for “the Ove’ ment because
they could 5 [su private busi-
nes: vy not be the case in’

2. Second.

Sisa
ar have Found helpfel on various

to. re:

would srokabiy

invited veg
ower ulll, =
of guy is
to try co use at.

ce ree me ne renee nen nein eapcatete ttt otf cone eapaene Gaver ame tnrinnrene Rr ne ate EN sae er te mame rue



--- Page 80 ---
Neyer nat corey

heen thereat onanndermeatnnecciiareart

= would net ba we
Several reasons,

Ov Stent on
Were civerted to comestitive free ence
the standard of 13 J Of both countrs
Fise ‘to levels whera no one would have ¢
Sex the present Suicidal forciga invelvecs

S &@ businessman i know that if you ca: 's
: ace yoia dollaz prefits, 24
Snoeld either revised or discontinued.

y

2. Second. The ené-result of doing Dusiness with
the CIA would he to get you to defect to our
Side. . , :

OW Of you, and of life in
ited states, Your would not. be ha
country. .

From ‘what =

éxre delightea > Sr
fortunately i hol pas ¢
“C&8n taxes are Rich enouch, But -donté
XOu wouldn't be 4 fe t's a creat ca
We ful feonle. Shey'a nronebiv
S Bossinie to make you con
you would never be hasvy.

: ,
I Yealize that is you kesn
uccees, That nothing vwentared,
Scay you til Zing an American who

fer vou,

ahaha pentane tenet ties



--- Page 81 ---
ee ee RS ET TR

lave de Oro.

PLACE ACQUIS

consider.
identify Himseii & to my secretary,
a friend.

Invited nie to Grink. Val asked if it wld te cs:
venient ror mé to get tocethe> this afternoon for a
drink, I checked my seredule & and said that today worls
not be a good Gay. Instes gested that he be: -
guest for lunch on ‘

&

nor with the “
Zi had to explain that it was * poreered
Génova, Londres and tnsurgentes.

“Camera not, the x
was going to. be attrizu
his Gamera thtougn me
camera anc reminded hi: noe co “gorget is.
this was aot the reason he- called ang that he ro2
wasn't in a big hurry to sell it. He said he. v

£0. conat with mes

ZI told hinato™ being the camera a ayway sin
just this morning _ s$oken to my friend who ovs
store’ and: was,sure I could® disnose ‘of bis, cts. nor

€

him, He ‘did perk up then. an& show some intetess
cameras .

ER DRA, tac UHR tT BL



--- Page 82 ---
sshe cure:

: Val had come, probably thi
lerse our miten with Val
ever, wus ose OF town this S
way. Val and Gloria Pinto (t .
Singles when I arrived. I had a cingies‘to
and did not join them until an hour later.
forned a Goubles group. I playea with Pepe Pinto, and Val

“played with Gloria against us.

4s is always the case, there is very little cncrtunity

for conversation during a tcanis mateh,. Val did make a. few
stupid comments of apolitical nature, but entirely harmless,
Such as, adéresséd to me, haven't you any control over your
friends the Shizsm Clinese? . .

I did not get @ chance to confront Valentin a
vecative comments and how they jeaverdized our

i-asked me if I had given dny thought to his recuest,
ane previoul, eck. I could not believe that he wes going to
on the matter about his offering me money for “secrets”.

ore Z owas genuinely seupid arout what request
reminded me that he had spoxen of a movie camera he w.
to seil ana which I had stated that I thought I could dis-.

pose of it for nim through friend s of mine, on consignment..

-£ told him to bring me the camer& and I would see what I

could do.

i then told Val. that there was something Z had wanted
to talk ‘to him about anyway, land noped we could get together
Sometime scon to do.so, He ‘stated that he would not come to.
the club tomorrow, He offex ved to take me to lurch sometime
Guring the weex.: re

This is not exactly what I had in mind
and not too pleasant stétement of my position about nis. .
: But I feel it can be used and vill achieve
Gesireé effect. Unfortunetély, he might spena tie next
few days wondering if I am about to accept ris approach.

bitten tv doce min topic of convers tdioa
during ul i ments 2 vailable between games or: sess

of tennis was Dvitri; Dritri was bitten by che noe keg
to the Counselor ef the Soviet
was fairly deép in- his i
fT, Nence there was

and chee “hs, 8

eyes cee ee em teeee ee



--- Page 83 ---
ayers. in the couruc
seussed the other
ey both kalone
Sve hy wite told Ruth 5
mace to having her turn of having the
entire croup et sur home fox lunch. veut that wal:
were wating for Val to leave for Moscow. tiv wité
said that she: thought it Llledvised for an Americaa
ho entertain a coviet. Ruth agreed.

Women ten

t sho was.

Neat

H
4
‘
4
t

Le SER eens rpm


--- Page 84 ---
diseugssing the job I could offer Take

‘meantine Iwas certain (and am certainly

‘enon 22,
de Cro. . Nl

5 24, 1969

a acent. Gloria ard J fave boca
for some Sehat Ehe might do to kces
busy and make a little moncy. = offered to Gace
matter with her monies c¢o Zp eitner to hire he
self or find a jos for-her, Tais Lunehwon date waz to
explain to her what jbo I had for Pere .

od. The First hour was yaxnx zpent
, would ine

volve her following up on-a list of americans anc -

Endlishvan in the D.P. to whom T-esat soma promociona on

DLs: sion of

‘|dterature recently. These are potentsal clients Zor

ono of the services of my business.

I qave Gloria a Looseleaf netbook with cones
all omy promotional litereturc to sata, include
translations. of the pertinent Ricercturce .
her-a couole dozen envelores with @ complete set cach
of literature and contracts. ° :

she is eager to start. She waats to test
ity to deal with people. Onée che has
confidende sha might leave’ me to ‘guarh her ow

Ye agreed that tris would be best for her,

be able to find sone clients for my pusiness.

Centideatial. Gloria asked mz if I had told anyone,
including my wife, about her possibly working for. z
gaia that I rad now She prefers not to toll anyone un

til she khows if she is qualified or not. |

gent days, it, appears.
she Vas not. only told her family, Sut Fas koen “éd
aceut the job, Pepa even scolded fer, saving th
married woren should not works. Gloria suid sre wes
simely fenoring nis Latin attitude.

Since that tine, in-r:

Gloria medtdoned Yal fiz
his Gesarture soon for b

ZI tod

sau ah

hotner Moe
satkously offa.ing
cOLnt Tye

ieee oneness a satin ep : :
: seen ens ponent eee Ne pm a ee ee A ni et sec



--- Page 85 ---
ue x
oria cid stat
&n intellivcnace
: to this role than I had ss = exeeetad. I ¢
: exvacced ber to be naive about val's inter

hag oo Seen the first t., mention or
ie ach was not the case, she refer cd to nis
activities and those of his friend Yohernich.

I owas particularly surerised at her : sovhistfeated .
titcde about @éherayeh. I Sorsoneily could rave

ted his intelligence activities LE 2 heats
nelly seca him conducting a clandestine weotine
streat corner in san Angel late at aicnt.

are.

. hOSe this opportunity to manifert a certain
naiveré on ny part. ner statem é.
ehers set x

tne Sublis “0 reports were true thet. ca
= the Soviet enbessy pérsonnel wore intellicence
officer .

Tn te nee ene eee

and SHEE “Knew ne wis

f roof us (Gloria and =) <

used anv overt term such as"spyv? omintelligenec
= *

money to work for sone Sovies Sontasae
feeis val is miseast, that Moscow hes
tad choice=“he is -too + not cold enough Z
anne that xind of work." ,

‘artinez is a comanist
odeece Val
meeting

Asengo for
varea, Sieaic aze hoard with several
_Sloria was invited ta-this house this £

Harchn 30ch. ©

BS

ao

ran
ee

arity for t
a8 3 liccia

pee. eeemiew ame | i

a Re Re te RR RRA Ree RN IR Comat A tn mm Re Sm ee Seite wee - . i :



--- Page 86 ---
ca ee een nate me MEH

CONTACT REPORT
FROM a Samuel J. KARTASUX

“SupgecT : Rafaek VIDIELLA Rute (2805)

A meeting wos neld ‘trom 1130 to 1430, 11 March 1969, in Chalupas Rosteurant
on Ave, Reforma, ‘one block west of Reforma and Prado Norte, The dato ond
hour of the next-riéeting. wAll be establishod by telephone, Subject will pick

up ‘Kartesuk on Reforma, in front of the Anthropology Kuseum at & specified time,

ae

3 XN ‘parkid. Ry. cer three blocks Korth of the. ‘Chelupas and walked to the

: neeting é site arriving there at 1125, Subject was waiting at a table roading

ono of the. Russian books I hod previously given him, We met, talked, and conducted

+ our necting over @ pertod of three hours and then parted company,

2 : The® “andtfad conversation wag general, lie at first commented on how
: woll, he “Liked the. two books. he had received from me, aud riade some statenents.

_ Qt 4 exes” MARTINEZ; OwKER OF THE PLAZA HOTEL:

on the truth of their context, We ordered some breakfast end I then asked hin

af he would mind falling ‘out the questionaire (PRQ) I had whth me, explaining
‘thot At was merely routine, He readfly. agreed: and i gave it to him and holped :
him £411 it out. - (PRQ aubaitted on 12 March), After completing the form I
brought out @ list of questins I wanted to ask and began going throrgh thea,

He answered all of those he could, providing. the following information: , . .

Rafael does not renenbor MARTINEZ full nane but t promised ¢ to
obtain it at the. first opportunity. ‘MARTINEZ has a wife and son, The wite

ordginally ‘comes from Santander, Spein, His son (no née | renenbered) ts about i

18 or 19 yeors of oge,, (8. years ago, now about 26) and at times was helping

sround the desk, of the hotel when Rafeol wes teaching his father Russian. (1960.

1961), Refeel gave MART ENE Russian for stout § nonths, ducing which tine
ARTINGZ learned ‘te Spook, and underatand fairly well, MaAdilacd Miver discussed

why he wanted to learn Rusaton wath Rafeol, nor ‘dad they talc poletica, other

Kuastan or Anerican,
as ogy


--- Page 87 ---
=

3)

when Rofack met PRIKHCOKO (P=2278) at the Placa Hotel, PR.
that he had somo business

\
did not expound on tho Subject.

Russien lessons, .

° a ‘toncher® from his Institute.

- lessons from his old teacher,

either Martines or tho Plaza jiotel,

B, PELATIONSHIP BETES Losiioy (ene) on) JUAN LUIS, DIRCTOR OF

THE LANGUAGE INSTITUTE ON TIRER:

one of these Russians since but does not know the namo of any of them,

CKO end Subject did not. ask, During the lattor part of 1962 Refeel

This was ‘the dest tine Rafedl saw MARTINEZ,

In about 1965. oF 1966, LOGISOY went te the Institute to texe

inglish Jessons, “He took lessons for about 6 to 8 months,

private, but given at tho Institute dy an n Anorican girl narod Janet (uxy

docs ret remenber her loat nemo, and ane $a ne longer there),

Ranner thet Stax Luli met LOGILey,

re ee NA I A RETESTED RA MRE EHR EE A ATE A SO

at tances

RO leter mentions?
with MARTINEZ concerning Tourtsts ond Tourdsm, but

MARTINEZ rover discussed his association with

“vat to ‘the ‘hotel and by chance saw four or five Soviets in FARIIMEZ of fice,
fe heard then talking, but ‘aid not go into the office. He thinks he hes seen
: Mertiner
_ never nertioned then or thoir business with hin, in Septenbor 1968, Just prior
to the Olympics, Rafael went to see vartinen, trying to drum up some ‘nore ‘private

MARTZ told hin ‘that he was} ready to take any more Russien
lessons, out thet he! was very dnterosted in learning German 6s s00n as possible,
Martinez, said thet he was currently (then) taking lessons, but that he did not .
“Like his teacher, (bia not say who his teacher was), Havsel offered to. bring
Martines mentioned that the German Olympic team
would be staying at his hotel, shortly after Rafael. brought @ esr from the
Institute nanied Gerda (LNU) to see Martdries, While there they were invited to
lunch and ‘not, three Moxican men and a talk Gorman who waid he was a representative
“of the german team, They had lunch, conversed about general things, and Rafael

and the girl left, _ The girl deter said thet Martinez kad continued teicing Germ: ca

Rafael could supply no diographical data on Martinez, or any further informatis

on sny connections with Soviets, Sudject hes not heerd any other Soviet nent ior.

Tho lessora wore
a Rafer!

dt was ja this

,

hs

rg
i. 2

paps namctneon ta scene RAAT


--- Page 88 ---
14-00000

Sennen eMC NRL m0 A estate Has a ame on ‘ tea tose

-
w

i

JUAR LUIS mentioned to Rafacl that he liked LOGINGVY, and they scened foarly

friendly, It was at the end of this period that Rafeol was introduced to

LOG1KCY by JUAN LUIS, shen LOGINCY terminated his lessons he no longer visited

the Institute. JUAN LUIS often sent his regards ‘to LoGIKey wie Refael, and
: asked that LOGINOV come to see him, This was mentioned by Refsel, out Loginov
continually. told R-fael to "forget itm, but did esk Rafeel to return the regards .
Rafael never questioned LOGINov on way he did not go back to the Institute, but
as for as Subject knows, Locinov has not been beck, Rafael has had meny
~ discussions with: JUAN LUIS but he has. never nentzoned any other Soviets in

Mexico, As far as his politics go, JUAN LUIS 4s a confirmed Leftist in ideas

; but Rafael would not call hin a Communist. Rafsel delieves that Juan Luis
was merely a friend to LOGINOV and had no direct relations with him other than
their association. through Jessons. ,
C, ‘Andrea CATARO (P-13, 546) s . ,
Andrea has mentioned to Rafsel that she net CRERSISH (P-13,042)
at the Space Exhibit while ske was working there, She also met several other
Soviets there, She becaze friends with then and invited them to her house
for s a dinner porty on two occasions, Rafael, invited by her, went on both |
occasions, On the first occasions there was a Russien woman, blend, about 6
: years old ‘ened: VALENTINA (Lx) whe spoke very, good” spanish; ‘a man nanod ;
. MISHA (LNU), supposedly an Electrical Tech from DUBVO Space Center near Moscow,
about 37 years old ‘and tall, who spoke excellent Spanish and who deter wrote. a
letter to one of Andreas girlfriends din Maxteo city (et. “named):;" and BORIS (axe), :
“about 3? years old, thin, nervous but with a lot of vitality. and personelity, - ;
‘Boris spoke excellent Spenisk also, and Rafael thought. it very ‘usual that he | ,
drank Anerdcan Whisoy are Coca-cola, (A-faed says this ds unusual for Russien:',
ferael thought MISHA a littie suspicious, thet he micht be KGS (he knows thot
‘ Sn casos such a8 this, mo one is aliowed to g0 anywhere with being accompaated
by the EGY) becouse MILEA apoke excelent Spartak amt secued to be the only ©

ore whe did not really fit,

vs + meas mciehucse een em nomen ete NN: REIS BA RIN A RNR +



--- Page 89 ---
. sees : Y
"N

She other Sovict was named VLADIMIZ (LXV), about 57 years ‘old, and did not

sperk ary Spanish at all, dut was 5 very nice, according to catael, he was the

i ; oaly true Scientist there, (Also from Dubna},

} : At the sccond: party tho Russian wossn did not cone, Androas Americen
boss fron the Exhibit cane however with a Nexiean Fan, (Rafael does not renenber
his name). Rafael Baz> he 'w was. a “nice guy. Ee was about 43 years old, tall ond
sxoked a cigar, He Joked with the Russisns and told them to be careful because ,

7 Andrea ‘was his spy. They all ‘Leughtd, Ee -cane with two dark Nexicans sind

left stortly after dinner, Rafael said he drank & considerable anount ard. left

hin over on other occasions, On one occasion Ck SNYSE brougnt another Soviet

4

4

1

| > drunk, eSERNISE did not ‘attend either ‘of these perties, Androa novever invited

‘ te andreas whon he said was a Military xan. ie name ‘mentioned by Andrea), Andrea

1 _ said thet. this one was a pain in the ass: because & he was so serious it ‘throvgh

- the group {her mother also) into @ depressed state, After the Exndott Cin ANISH:

‘started calling Andrea at hone and inviting her to mest han an various cafes, ,
which ske aid, He cautioned her to “never call hin at the Embassy. ‘He was

dnvited to her house many tines and often sat and discussed Lis polities {any

ell other topics) with her’ and her - noth > . | Ker mother tock issue with his poi’*
4.

ger nother liked: CHERNISH but does not knox thet 3 Andrea is seeing him on the s?

She would net approve of Andrea going out with CHIENISE | at “all, _ CHERMISE, began -

|
j
|
|
1 .

: 4. ro . making amorous advances to Apirea and. tried to talk her into going to bed with
| hn, Andrea. told Rsfaol that he is a very nico avy, she Snead hin, “mut wes ofr”
\ She said th-t he almost eonvinced her to € to bed, and thet it ds her decision
; that she 4s no longer goins to sco CE:RXYSH for fear oF doing 80, Raracl had
\ cautioned her about what she had to lose 42 she aids She edatiaues to like
; .

CHERNYSH however,

- Andres had a ‘party on 1 March and asked Refacl to Javite LOGINOY,

¥ at ali,

YH went to thig party, Rafscl 21d not bother to ask ios


--- Page 90 ---
. o \

Arirea hes often extendsd an invitation to soshhov through Sefael, but when :

“ Rafecl mentiones this to LOGINOY, LOGINOY has told nin to Terget it because

me ae eee

other people fron his Exbassy are seaing her and LOGINGY does not want to
appear there and ceuse trouble, LOCINOY' did not| expound and R-fael did not

. ask further explenation, Rafael thinks ithat CHEANTS really wantea to take
Hoo Andres to bed, but ho also thinks that CHLRNISH 4s up te other things leo, .

He has no. idea whet, but just suspects, : oe .

x | The meeting with Rafsel, sfter three hours, was cut short at this
fo. . time because he had some obligations, fis gonerel desly schedule 49 as follexs:
, _, Mondays 1500-1600 Classes at the Instituto, gereral,
1630-1730 Private clesges at the Institute,
Tuesdey: 1000-1100 Private lesgens for APRIAK\ At Institute,
— aagoazjo ie a en)

1500-1600- Classes at Institute, general,

1600-1730 Classes at Institute, Private,
wednesday 1500-1600 Clesse at Institute =, :

1630-1939 Privaté Lessois on Palmes to. CHRISTINA. ,

2000-2100 Private lessons, John BLANEXEGAL

.

“ thursdey 1500-16¢0 Classes at Institute | ‘
- 1650-1730 ‘Classes at Institute
1830-1930 Private lessons, Meria LUZ
2000-2100 Private Lessons, John BLAMSIEGAL 7 .

 Pridey 1500-1500 Lessons at Institute -
: 1600-1730 Lessons at institute,
At.the end of the meeting I gave him an emvelope with 1,002.00 pesos in cash 5

So nena ee nt eer ee

an it, He accepted it graciously and said thet thet would lest hin about 2%
hours considering the debts he had to pay, «oe loughed, I trought out & receips -
Sra asked bin if ho would rind signing it for mo, 1 aaid it wea Cor eccountin:
purposes (he did not ask), He said "Sure" and asaned dt temedietely, “e lett

the restaurants walked to his ear, and Bald Boodbuy urtil next nesting,

annette annette nutter seen



--- Page 91 ---
tenet enn

eee “ ~
" “e stood by tho car talking for about three minutes, and I promised to cell
| hin during the afternoon of Friday, 16 Mazh, Cn departing he grinned ard said
4 to sey hello to all of his associates thet he doestnt know, Z said "Sure will"
i : and walked ovay, .
y .

a 7 f * :
cl “once JOE J ie

_ Samuel J Kertasuk ’

“Peary LB ent!
fr: orwell nate bh outbiien for :
“ ae

| Pe se me mma ramen pameen ye tate + eaemeen tei etnias pent snovner mourns ens -winryay arson Yemen ame ”

weet ae ns

rte ae ow e
0 emi chee BEL Gon: : fe foe CoP ee sZin “



--- Page 92 ---
a,
‘
ere re
“- :

Salida ai (651159) .=2350.-valent fn y Keehko  quoden dow

“worse ot adbado’ 8 ias- L000h.en o2 elub para dagar y Valentin
' pide le avis “a “Ball, ‘Heehe acepta.< yi.

°

wars

aa



--- Page 93 ---
1200,

(3/59; Comtuo keal Neotel.

4, natica Given by
\
2 »/i save Rowton four panes for insertion into the # i :
notebook which he had proviously propared end turned over
Station. . Lo .. : 4 .
IN/4 also gave Rowten a meme on his roconmeniations with pen
othe oustanding baianace of the loan to i (1,000.60
> in which LIARvAls/1 propses to see il nore asd te
optain frou him a receipt acknowledeing; the outstanding balanca!
_ OF the ordininal- loan. . |
aA thivd report given to Rowton reveals what apnesrs to have been
an 13 approach made to LIREALH/4 by Valentin Lomuinoy on 2 RPebrusry,”
4959, at tha hone of a minal friend, Luis Gomoz. Lorutnov arain
made roSerence to his previous alle tona coaceraing LIES
affiliation with WORAC? but this time skid that he was preparcd: to
: - pay "a lot " of moncy for any information LIn: /4 mich’ obtain
i for hin. L/4 reported to Rowton that he finesse] aa at ag could.
: i ‘that the only person ne was close to in the WOLADY complex
: i owas

an official in tho economic section. LIK ALH/4 comnented to kow~

ton that.he felt certain at this point that Loruinov was bluffing ,

’ esacerning his having actually seen IL/1 with UCFACT officers "soyeral
t orns ,end that this was a prelude to an approach to

shat Loguinov had been planniaz for some tine.

wast gs.) 74
Beso 2a sano

retive:

ve Rovton an accounting for his 1,5c0 neso revolving

L/1 explained

& total

$s sudden increase

his new

Sarret, Ko atates

PEnses oveoy

.



--- Page 94 ---
an enees
I GLOWO noses

vould bas
Lit roquesavad thot Bas rovolyia”
to 12,000.00, and that x
“Sha 21078- 75 ho spent in os

so that bo -

6. Cuidsnca/zaforsasion Given So Agent?

Rowton anreed, with LIRE&: an concerning “the appronan: aot he Guinev and
prozise’ te give we Station guidance on his ‘fu ‘ i
Tocuinov. Rowton as a to move very cautiously vi
ies officer basore réces

afer tho reoxezt for

in the hose of Raving the

WY Rio | oe :

“wallace B. Rowton :



--- Page 95 ---
" SUBJECT: valentin Loquinov

OATE OF INFORMATION! February 2, 1969 .
PLACE ACQUIRED: “barty at the home of Dr. Luis Gomez,

Our tennis group meets occassionally at each Others .
hones, for lunch, dinner, or just drinks, ‘huis Gomez
inv@ted us this time to his home in Rxay Pedregal for
lunch, : a : :

After I had made a point of not sitting near val,
. Several women wanted to change places and val and . SL

"Another person changed placea putting Val next to me.

7 ned the old issue by Saying that ‘he assumed
I was working for the company. He said that he -had seen
mea. personally"several times” at: Sanborns with American
intedligence officers, I asked who he saw ma with. He.
avoided the question, I than volunteered that it must:
have been Bil} Spruce, with whom I frequently have
lunch, He asked what section Spruce wag in, I answered
the economic. He seemed disgusted, and saad Spruce .
wasn't worth anything, . :

He ope

Val then said that he wanted me to know that ha
was prepared tno pay a lot of money for any information

"I then asked val if the Americans had ever offered
him any money for his information. lHa averted my eyes
and answered "not yet,’

COMMENTS
' Val ia an assy! . ;
“Several ixtmagk times® ie, of course, inaccurate _  ___ an

and shows that he is: guéesing, It seens very unlikely ©

that he saw me even t one time.

Val probably regreta that we have not approached:
him. But he is Rextmiomdtct not so stupid that he doega -
not realize that we know ha has ro trade, profession,

Skills, or talents which would make life for him any©

it, and he must realize t
for him is out of the question. He. would only make a
short-term profit in doing so, . . ‘ .
, T have invited B£1l Spruce to Lunch this week, I. ’
will develop him as my excuse and answer for any further
provocations by val, Spruce, incidentally, ia a very
clever. and helpful person. My last meeting with him was

two yeara ago and I 4m et¢i11 Lenefitting from his advice.
He has since transferred: to tha finance fection, but

this should not affect hia va lue to me and my cover,


--- Page 96 ---
4-00000
z

6

2, TLRS «el Aa TN RRO oT

+ tei aS,

~ ~

fan SUPJECT? VAlentin Loguinov
= DATE OF INFORMATION: February 1, 1969. 1200 hours.
PLACE ACQUIRED: French Club

Interest in Arerican School. val asked me if I

could recall the address of the American school. He will
+ call me for kk it, He wants to have nis son Dmitri par-

ticipate in some activities with the children at the

‘school in order ‘to learn English, Dmitri finishes
School at the Russian embassy at 1400 hours. Val hopes |
that maybe there are some afterschool activities such
as football for Dinitri. | : :
. COMMENT ° . . -
_This may be just val's inate stupidity. Maybe he

really couldn't find the American Sbbool in the tele+
phone directory. . -

i
|
fa
i
{
i
i
{
i.

: Perhaps Val already knows of some after-school activity
of which I am unaware. Mayke -he already knows that Someone'B
‘child is there, Someone he wants to meet. Perhaps he wants

an excuse to wander about the school, meeting people, . on

Perhaps val couldn't care less about the school. Per= .
*: haps he is hoping for an excuse ‘to call me, Suggesting our p
. chiddren practice English together, Perhaps he is preparing . ies.
the ground f£rx-to go to someone else he already has in mind
.£0 explain that there is no convenient program of after=
school activities for Dmitir, He might ask that person to
agree to have Dmittt play with his children.

. . . . It just occured to mé that for the first time in many
months valentin, spoke Russian to me. While I was playing
tennis he shouted to mé in Rusaian, "You really are olaying .
with your left now". And-latér, “You. look tired". When I . ys
answered that I was and that I had a head-ache, He looked oo ‘5
‘particularly pleased. Normally he doesn't even answer my Ae
Good Mordang in Russian. Perhaps he is Preparing the xxsyx :
way for me to suggest an exchange in language lessons: -he
helps me with my Russian and tx my boys play with Dimi
in. English. my . co .



--- Page 97 ---
A PEST ADY SG OA ATE,

gs a . —. . of . wfc

SECREY i . re
| i fpec-
cated PO

. 3 FEBRUARY 1909

SUBJECT: Valentin Sergyfvich LOGINOV (P-11712) a

Attached are five LIEMBRACE Soviec farget of turiity reports which
cover the period: 12 Deeember 1968 which was the first surveillance to

four follow-up surveillance reports‘on the first one. On 12 December 1968

the LIEMBRACE team picked up LOGINOV in Colonia Buenos Aires in the company

" of an unidentified Mexican aan. The LIZHBRACE team followed the Mexican

& LIKAYAK check
ea
revealed that the placas were listed to

phe

+ + — he ch
| tgnacis VALLINA Barros and Susana de VALLINA Fabre

EN

_ man , who got into a Renault Dauphine with placas 350 HS.

arian, Borilaee
A further LIKAYAK check revealed that the VALLINAs did not live. ae this Adolfo ~

Prieto address and no further ‘action was planned.

On Thursday, 2 January 1969, LIEMBRACE-5 went into Sears Department Store

on Bjercito Nacional and thought that the store detective was ‘identical to the

men spotted with LOGINOV on 12 December: 1968. LIEMBRACE - -14 said that alehovgh

.

the store detective looked alot Like the man seen with LOGINOV, he wasnot :

“Sdentical. “Photos_of thie atore detective are attached.

On Friday, 3 January 1969 che LIEMBRACE team went to Sears ‘Store on Ejercito
Nacional to eheck out this store detective. The people at Sears said chat tf a
none were given to chew, they would cooperate.

On Thursday, 9 January 1969, che LIEMBRACE tean picked up the store detective

as he was leaving work. Tne store detective went to a house at Lago Chiew 142-4.

Prior to that he went to an address at Avenida Claverfa 4-1.

On Priday 10 January 1999 the LIEMDRACE Ceaw gave-us the result of a check at

theee addresses. They are the tollowing:

waco
Address: “Adolfo Hrlato 1302, Mexico 12, mE 2160's came dkt Qbuna

a” Lo
DOR U7 2,

cwmommns COPIES ADE 6



--- Page 98 ---
teneeieniieenbirabmemntecdeenae ete

TOE enh cee seaamaned ceninetnehte en asked sid arene ag in 8 ate ee en

sEe rR ET

ht Lik

jotecte LOZANO Sanchez

Nawe of the sivre detest
a Lago Chiem.142-a, spartnent 12-.

Name and address of his a Byclaverfa S401

Leonors LEAL widow ‘Brevis. -

This information is for the file. No concrete Tresulte of the LIEMSRACE

check xuxm were obtained, as the man who got into the Renault with placaa

380 HS does not appear to be identifiable with the Sears store detcctige.

«ead ease ot _

SECRET i



--- Page 99 ---
Rondel or Nanri eI, ees oer aenaente F itera

1
I

2 GE ee

A fe 4 fnbes Me. lean

F7tC Thee vole, 6
aimee by OJ



--- Page 100 ---
4

foe
SOURCE: CIEMBCACE ~ af.
| ; ‘ DiTEs Viernes 10 de enero de 1969. /
_ PILE:

4 Nombre: Jaime Losano Sinetes

: LS ’
Direceién: Lago Chien No. 142-4, interior 12~A. De

ee

\ Domicilio de su anica, % tal _ves ven su amante: Av. Claverta No. Shel. Su nombre ‘es
| . - “Leonora Leal Vda. de Medicis de Medicis



--- Page 101 ---
ye SOURED C1 ECUPEAI CHE
TATE: Juevos ¢ de cnero de 1969,

PASTICIPANTS: 1,2,4,5,10,14,
; FIUr . :
SUBJECT: Surveillance of SuspecH cone” af Svier teerol”

“1830 Presentes en’ Sears. Roebuck de MExico, Sedes, Bye
1947. Sale et sajeto por la puerta de éaigleaion. Lleva una bolsa stands “de papel: ‘de la th

er ae

§ s Subs a un plytouth ', “r949, color anil, Placas No. 768 GA. que “estaba ‘dentro dsl esta-

‘ctonaaients de Sears y 8° va.

Peds REAM ate 11

2005 Se estaciona frente aun etificio de deptos. que esta en la dv. ¢ verta ilo, 84. Ze P 1s:
: Antes de Meear aqui dié varias, vueltas inwecesarias, como chetfndos ra
: 8008 Se baja del carro. con la bolsa de papel. E tra al edificlo y entra al depto. No. len

la planta ‘baja.
2010 Saie del edificio. Parece que no le abrieren, Sube al carro y permanede ahi.

og Gk we te,

2015 Sale una mujer del edificio. Se acerca al éarro y habla con el sujeto y éste se baja
del carro con la bolsa y entra econ la mujer al depto. No. 1. ‘la mujer abre con llave.

2120 Sale el sujeto solo. ‘Sube a@ bu carro y se va.

2128 Entra : a una veneindad que. e@st4 en Lage Chien No Ma ‘abre ‘con lilave a la viviends
No. 12 ‘o 18, no ®e pudo ver bien pore @ estaba.muy. 0 ca TO: , , i

nas Cancelatos.

estaba la eapleada de Personal,«

NOTA: No pudi tos preguntar por a en Sears, porque’ 20°

ye (PNRITO. cE
. : : : y = : _ ;

ORAS A ea



--- Page 102 ---
SURE, | : “ ot
SATE? Tieras 3 de anero de 1969, cf 0”
oo 4 .

_ FILE:

SUBJECT: Tavest tgactén sobre el detective de Sears Roebuck, Byéresto Muctonal,

“personal. nos- aiyeron que tenfan 10 detectives y que no. nos’ pee

: En las: oftcinaé
_-dfan properctonsi-tog niombf'es dé todoss que: si nosotros ai les: dibanos el -nombre'-dao~
e: nos interesaba, eitos: onos éartan tes datos que. fol: ianosg 2!

They ff Caes 3 # & seweehak hero “) He cheek Luar
wish TF wll: pve Lif he Hh Fyn sce VLLINA
tohrcon Piles 530 HS ave gated ne nat om



--- Page 103 ---
Jn angnseieh # Mjstdewnrsanan nda AH Ae aN ON eh et eer ne esenen st

_En la ceseripcién que dteron ellos ese dia dijeron, que en ta cara se le vela como que ab

-” tenkdo ach, Yy este no ‘tdene. ninguna navea de esag, De todas maneras: lo fotografianons,

ry

ao SURE KEL CACHE

: | . DATE? Jueves 2 de Enero de 1969,
oe FANTICIPANTS: 1,5,14.
ae Set — a

SS tus el nartes aL a la tends Seare ‘de Ejercito Nacional yle parecié que el detective. de
. goth tienda @2 61 mieno que | 2 vid con LOGTNOV.Lievanos a 14 para que también lo identdficara. co

Dice 14 que se parece mucho, pers que no es, § dice que esth seguro que ei 08,

Buscamos el Renault en el estactonasitehto y no estaba,

we



--- Page 104 ---
wo
.

“soins L/ AAT BWA CEE ©

he

3 Jueves ‘12.de dic. ‘de 1968,
ART ICHSANTS# 5,16.

oteatrices de’ acrié, vestids con traje completo café claro y corbata,

Se. _Srsotan en Concepeién Méndes yt Dr.. Andrade. Se cancela a Loginov. . - * Lae

Sale y espera en Is puerta,» a

Entra nuevamente al. restaurarite y habla por teléfono, No se pudo: ver el ntinero at ‘este.

chat neda por ave habia intittea de. martachis. dentro del ‘restaurante.
Ter-aina dé hablar por tenéfono, Jy sale ¥ sé va caninando.
1, Sube a un Renoult Dauphine, ise, negro, faltratadd, placa 580 by ‘que |

= . 7 aaa _
PBOWS Fons Metoga © o ey,
ke col be . (Syp asa Yakov (aid 7. So
c zit 5 ‘
4 Sy k aw? GEA Seecara ole Ph évena, TEL poe,

pi kanT Gath, tol Phew s
hes belie Pucte 1202

Shits i BF



--- Page 105 ---
SECRET

. amare Tepe

: sates the Soviet aba dy on 23: Pebcuaty 1969 ‘twee 1389 -Sugerot at

Chevelle. LOGLNOV, according’ to LIENVOY was: # echetutod to go ‘te

tha border the week of 16 Feb 1969. to pick up his new car.

SECRET...



--- Page 106 ---
sho

in iussia, Subjcet eefd- thet wien he first arrived ¢: Texico his masor cesive

vas to visit a ddok store, Shen he meneged. to visit one he vas ansted at
_ the variety of literature for sole which was, _rosensfery banned to Russians,
He could not help. feeling nervous while an the bookstore, ard later ered

when he got hone, "(ue to the enotions he fei

1). at the Tirst oonortunsty

he begen biying ‘and re sll of the books he could | afford, It toox ‘hin

, tine Fo order te be able to sit ine public and onenly reed a -

2 and! -of ‘tear.

out that. trea tors Jes he h-s “+ heer, the Cebens* hed

- 9 much kiz gher econonte “ptenderd of living (then be

(TIT on reennen nae aren e neenetcmee nema weeps a staveecee ps ime Kase «
te a, .

: . VW .
regine. Ee has often discussed ‘these polotics de Loses v. In a crord .

(rest attitude) texards Cuba is one of disgust. During diser: ssions ine

grovo, LOGtkoy hes stated thet they (Soviets) ere not 49 favor of Cuerilles’

operating in Centrel. and S. America, He hes repeated this chile privetely

\tedking, wath  Subgret, :

ve discussed « ase: rent: parts of the 0.S,. dn: terns or ceogtesty. ant wast: it.

zed to offer, Senseo» repeated tet ris wife a seers, Ahonen thet it wer: Ad.

4 Sree sreeme a

7. renee Ape L&

Seer eee ee

A Aa A a ee recto

: reeled 7 / Werk v Dice 6), bonds
; Je te. _— © RNG hae ” &7
a)

- f) Gt rte


--- Page 107 ---
an cherge of the swerizcat

had psmmission to Zire there for three nant

where the Colonel stazsed it end pot his

Rea to be dese ery three : mon

slio with tS

¢ Colonel becene a | good « “aera °.

- idtonéters. & tat is rot S

passaort since it mick? [init his

t intenvdeved

three years igs

Subject now wooss). sfter the introiuctisn they went to the Sires tor 5 anctnent

in the ‘vast six mont 3, Locriey hos mad
that: Sebseet pres Fe and give hin personal
info:nstéog. on Bis: 5s

vo. the States, {Ee vents the ‘usuah personel in:

ed LAINGY on eri. 0:

towards Ines sise35).”

RE LP wE

yer » KARTASUK

ake tee , _ Xefaee DELLA Ke
dats oy edt ‘16 7.

ern ohana moc ONES 28SEC: ZRF i

[



--- Page 108 ---
his mother

nia 8 a feb,

Eubgect met PALEOOZ0 dxi-the- Phaze

evort). PRIEE IDE was there “to meet ‘the’ o

PRIKEOOX net) talked ty the akene bocth they

eens nae spamen ec ee eee ttt a
a
Tao

o.

fo To the

:
I must have mistaken him).

17.

ent

fet aryiement”

bat to no avedl),

ametepunprainnemsinibetenint-82' tte sate matinee wee negate nnn

»
hin stds tire he aise teuc
art e yisited Chante
My svore ef the ceancetians
3
' Skee

avel tn Mexics, he reson

wont ‘to the dar to meet: the
She omer did not show up an they then wen DCS avartment

Vo where Subjéct stayed for Ginner, while the ¢ he

j thet CRIA YSH dia not ever try to reesus ain For anys

2 hin auring the previous reeting,

S. anytine she wants

just turned

ROYSS is bo: “+t 37 .yeers old and ANDREA
CHERNYSH on seversl ocersions

very angry abo:t this and says

OREA, end he: Ko ress that, cui niys t Gisneet) i

@co ani bes not seen

ta manned &

Seiten pe ee

a

Poyh ar. See se


--- Page 109 ---
os

eh oe

“peSes per resth as loag as those clidents

Poe ve
een lined =

; ‘y
sed, Wilicg® and able to help
a Soviet coat.

Glozie also 4 wants to open a Shop, she thous
2 could hondle

aa oh
Rea. Spa
: pro. V ork for Sone
. Or OS. EN. problons Ann:
‘volved, I= +t ovm shoo, She admits
ob education, ‘She has never wor! xed in

: ¢ frankly,
Shere is- Somsthing she could éo for my cover
rusiness, Zt need Somasne who is attractive, mature,
be not hecessarily verv iatellicent, and not
sarily very exper=cnced, to contact potential
ce, I think Gloria could
“Thad ins & commission.

$ 2a reetevd-no. sal ary, but
would receive a ize 33 entage each month (26s).
oz the incexs due to-¢ nts she ontained. Letts
say She would bring me 100 clients evor a period
OF two or thse years. Lec's say Surther
esca cliert wuld x = = an ince 32 6F
per month. Sha would eivh 620% 256 x

vai

aad whether
She eculé wer
Shor weald pISCha
& per week, She woe

continted to wOEk for ma
NaS Tittle or a +

mY Set 2 cxuota of cf
26 eng es the ye

over tha

Eerie briny



--- Page 110 ---
and v

a

pably pree.
sovks
ought to ba given to the possivility thee

might alresdy ke working r the Sovicts Ganich
I @ount) and could be targetted against Te

3. Ft woud net

voi a bea wi ste’ of time cons 4 a
. Soviet section has probably given thts: “sort. of : .
‘thing a great decal of experienced thought. I oe ps
do believe that Valentin and Gloria might be Bo
having an affair for strictly personal .and :
non-operational reasons. I further believe’ . ‘
that: valentin might actualiy be paying “his
own way at the French Club to pursue a sport .
she is fairly ccod at and yyS—eANG not es
excuse to go to the fr : Club to find.
oottatial recruits. coe

Z can see 2 pousible
tea by false Mexican secret
one see vio would go something like this: .

We (the Nexiczn secret.service} have ob=
served that she (Gloria) has beén seon
in the company of valeatins We kiow
Valentin to be a very dangerous and
Gestructive person to’ Mi XL COS ,

Would ° s be | wi illing to report ‘on Vale.
_entia, 3: S personality, his viéws, >
nis activi es 63 as Yar. as She ‘is aware’ of.
thenis ce :

(tater) would. she be willing: to: ume.

comments which would en courage vai <
. . . a tin to try to
. ee w6uld: Se that

oe ea:

fz :
: who are anare AG ‘communis os. “is - -
.gzowing more. and more 6 appointed sesh

Or the Be. se fore on

was

eventual. value of Glosis



--- Page 111 ---
14-0000

cast some Of the

eht keen

me
Sms

oviet

amengs. fram Vale



--- Page 112 ---
from Yale



--- Page 113 ---
savin cory ete bE SET.

3

-thet nroneeting hin in dcasules vas not on oceident Shag gone these for s2,
: . c

“CONTAST REPORT
FROM t Samuel J, KARTASUE

f contest with on 29 danuary 1969,

SUBJLCT oo: Rafach VISILLLA x

lot in the Zoe “Rosa and: ended

2 KARTASUX ror iis car an @ pes
‘to the vicinity of Sanborns en Refownr snd Siser, ASUS T-called she

Language achood Where Sudjeot icachos ora wes told thot he had not yor arrived
“for elas’, I called again at 1:05 and was informed “that he was airendy an- clres..”

Ag 1545 I Segan wadtang an” ‘front | of the. Language

Re came out at 1610 end wo walked “toverds Sarborns,
la Mansion Resteurant on Insurgontes’ Sur but & 6 eetd the t bo Bd a cla:

tron 1630 to 1806, ws wont to the Serb borns var ard. had a drink,

I thought 4 th-t two girls rE hed ‘provious]y met wore going to meet me et the La

“Mansion at “1700 and that I wonted hin to go with ie. after Sone discussion he

‘ Gecdded that he could postpone the class until Friday, but would heve to wait
: until 1630 for the pup to” arrive, an order to inforn hor, vie hert the Bar. ot

1530 and encountored the student by thé magezine stand, Subject nede his “€X0USCS,

and + wo started walking to his cer, (Suogcct nad not wanted to miss his class,
‘end after ‘some @iscuston in the bar, he offered ne bis car in order “that I Tonicht

go to. La | Nonsicn and get the girls, i told him that I elso wanted to est, act

thet there was @ possibility that ti ¢ givls wouldnt show up, He finally corzented

after soxe etnsideration).- -

ve ercived. at La Hansion shortly, voters 1700 andy went inside, tery wire
the car perked in the Rostauvant lot, Aftor sitting down and obderdazg Grass :

ania | stoak, Z “told & hin that z would lize to dfseuss a. fev imsertont iten. thet
had a lot A+) > to wath hts future, G hed es entioned during the oreviéus Reetine
that I had soxe busincas to talk to hin bout}. Tbegon by telling his thet

an our relationship I hid neglects? to mextion poteths ne dspostant .

UXRSCSS Bursose of Rectang Los sitey cansddesstle ghemmdng, Swsyect pusr art

there S4th acela anused Loos

the



--- Page 114 ---
ohare ey so 7 7a

Fa ee eee ae me ee an one ees oun eee

‘as, It ea intelligence Officer for the
U.S. Geverrment", and showed hincsy 2 3. Cast, Eo locked at 4t, raised his

on bis foce, (rem the look on bi

eyebrows, Dut never changed tas cx

face, one might think ho was vatehtn> a Bugs Sire my cartoon), I said thet aor

files shov thet for some years hs hasxeonstacrable contact vith mendcrs of the

Ls
fy

‘Seviet KGS, “Sefore I could go any Airthes bs stetcd thet be was not a mexber

of the KG3, nor did ho over vork for then, Isead that thet’ was what ve believed

and that vas also “Ad i wonted 20 t4lk to Ads,

Thad a 9 Proposition to aoke to ate

. ana din. the. pest) by the 3 to work for then, at prosont he 4s being hounded
: ay Valentin (testNov) to réport, on ‘his Moxfean fr ends, Ee considers the KB
to be a bunch of Basterds (Cabroncs ) anc thot ke does not belicve in ail of this

under the table spying, ser docs Ke boldeve dn what the KGB are toying to do,

ond if Imm involved tn this work, and I sm asking hin the sane thing, then I's

tate ce einapne satbeepee,

uate

He seid or sone tine now, LOSING,

: tho s sane kind of bastard that the KGB avo,

and asked that he (Subsect) srot Kexdcans (students)

. “has called han, met hin,

five fre either going | to ) the Us. or look like they might be promising in thet

and thet ho (Subjest) presare biographical date and other deteiis

i respect,
"about their sutrent lite, ara arrange Lor then to moet LOGINOV at paridcs, ete,

LOGINOY, during each meoting with Subject, Tangs an enveloso vi ith “500 poses in
f

tt ete ee eren nce tay vee

‘thot he

i

ns this to Subject, Subject 345

cash’ ‘dn ‘dt, and con eheuatiy! oft

at that ¢ to date + no hes: not furnished i y Inforn-tto+ end

does*nt say “yes” ‘or nd,

has sot accented any money, . He Likes. BEs tends and -aeitent

63 thedr

We

these. students are young, and nice ‘people, and the: Kea besten,

_ hands. of. f then, He saic thrt he appreciated tue fect that 1 tinned

stely showed

chia an of ffatal-1,D, eand and desisred nyseif, Because” Lost

the decency to do thet, Logmsoy has hevar showed hic anyths

wate Fee neem tte mee erent



--- Page 115 ---
tented the courtcsy of qclline’ him why he wented the

ani doesnt

Seht have-paid nere attention, b.t he (Subcet) ddd sot l4ke the

SGIROV went ¢ bo tat, elfering mene and trydng 49 con him,
Subject said, granted, ho needs mony, end the 500 pesos: always looks rood,
but that £¢ he started doing xnet I OSINOV wanted, the sirht of the money would

make ain shek afterands, : ‘I told Ain thet. we. were not tntorested inthis -"

udonta; bit thot we wantod” to stop tho SOB in: their efforts te undermine

thor net4ons ‘and’ erect sabotage against the U.S. ‘Ke night not like the dder:
“of under-the-table desling, but it was a real fact of life. If 4t were not

for the ourrent. undor—the-table conflict, the vorld would probably be rushed 7

ian Sit

ato a nuclear, war, and he knew what that ‘Beant, what was going on in the -
espionage fdeld was “actualy a doterrant, ‘and thot the people Anvolved vere .
composes of the ‘best minds of two worles, I. recalled his (Subject) two werld
powers opinions (previous? ly expressed by hin) ang, asked hast what: he - planned “to
do. Ee couldnt return to Rusia} his current ‘tuture prospects in Mexico were :
not too pronising, and he had previously mentioned thet he wanted to go to the
aS. Ir dtrs true thet thero are “only two important povers in the world, then.
, he had better. ertously consider where ke vants. to place his nerbles, Covortunity

hae

: does tnt knock every day. ard he was talking to 3 representative of the U.S

~, Govern ent at the 1 moment, ito was waking 8 proposition direc Ly to hin (Subsect),

Subject said thet tact was all trea; he at first wanted to return to z W355 9 ‘but

atter Seoind sone things 4 in Mexico te peslized: that! be could never be Eazy in

Russia again besause of the ‘opsressive vegine ond: the leck of freédon, {Ze
edited the recent Russien javasion of the Checks ard‘ said thet. 4 tvkade. his sick
to see the Russiers do this), He said that he was not happy in Mexico dat th-t

he-couid live here 0.x,

LF pend any


--- Page 116 ---
OEM BoA ah,

_—

VT annette ee tree epee weer ee ee ce nee eee

.
their Us. equivalent, The Si

mentelly ruin hin, Tesandless of ary Ronty Teceived, I told hin thet one

- of our efforts is trying: to Bie:k the Koa. “ion they go after peoole th-t torn

“4 out ‘to be bis friengs. Ee ean thing that he he (Subdsect} ds not involved, but

. that as’ far. fron the “e trash, Ee Bey not wok for the 2, “but his assoctatiors. .

with thea have’ deen. — for sexe > tine and thet a a thick file. alrendy exists

5 his, I kno? hin person=lly noe, and like hin, ond if he refuses to work vith
me Im, obligated to write it uo thet way, *Y superiors wil] deter Sit don

with se and ask the resutis ts, and rh tell them thet Raced is a nice gy. honest,

oy.

“sincere, and I firmly believe that he is cenpletely Ranest a

this however will”
nét answer the question shy he will not ‘coozesete, and then at ts 4s put on: paper
: * wall just be a.cold Feport lacking person: ity, and the Paper will Andieste.
thet he night be working for the XG3 ri reserdless of any opinions tacked on to the
“potter, In a case like this, protocol between the TS. and Mexicen Goverments
“ requi¢e that we eventually turn over to then any Fezorts on people in their
country who aight be involved with the Russisns in efforts serinst Mexico,
In- his case, his file would be turned over to the 3 vexicans and then he can inagine.
that could ‘happen, By the time the. Secret Service ‘Stezped harresing hin. or ke
round up an gail, he would oy Living a nisersble isles. All this gust .ror ‘being
innocent, For this Feason,. and for reasons inrolvt Z.the fect thet csa real
person ino reel ;Worid he cantt eStore Hist to sit om the middle of the fence,

he should seriously consider ey propes!tdon,



--- Page 117 ---
wl thet if dt was,

Subject sald that whet

bu would rather go to cc4l or be harraceed

Ke any cit Perenses

hes wath ws es the KOS. YF tel? hin

"mot a threst bet a resliiy, ant thet he shovld sanreetsto

nm bedn fresk wlth iasinoy ddd,

to con bik, Iwas only asking. i

cocision ss, :

and thet 4f dts "Nom, then Tel) do everything dn ny power to sce thet he.

ot is eantt “geruntce srything because

yecoinered, bie

renains untouched and |

a bure*ueratie structure Was. involved ond- a didvat have the. final’ ‘sey. i teld .

hin thet uriles: oo everything he had, told nic" during our previors ‘iosoct- tion es .

connlete B. 5.,.thea to hod a duty to ot least consider what 1 was asking,
(8y now we had been at ‘this from 1760 to about 1930), Finally he asked me
whet 2 would want of bin, I said thet I wanted hin to work with me directly
ageinst the KGB and that I nad no intsrest-in his friends of students ot ally

if ko was concerned about the KGS bastards bothering his frienis, this vas -

- his” chance to helo me do Something about 4t, We can't operrte alone, He hes
the intelligence, the cbility and the oppertuntt ty to doa great derl and he
should Snvolve himself. af only for the ideals that ho hes previously express ed,

‘ (Se thovght about it for a few zonients and began to talk abost Yuriy ¢:

nt get 3 along

with imerdeans ard consegu nity wes of ly in interested dn working ‘with ‘Nexter. “rs, but

a; .
f CHRIS tricd to reerutt Subject te work agains t tnerteens, Subject refused,

ye

/.

en LT :

& - :
however vas trying to work on | ANDREA cotnhechs § tr. tend) and this mace

bin damned md, _ The. girl ANDREA was only about 1 o> 17, ord sa sweot Little pind,
if, cand they (x8) hed ro » Business, frying. to Bie * on. her: "Subject said thet he -

i : nt Russie,” “hen the nan pot through
‘ Sgbseet asked hin in fussten 12 wes from the inbrssy., Tne men gave his nose

tasked Subject 1° bis asme wes ne

oy



--- Page 118 ---
seen Sis pieturc. ,

thet night ond

ROYSH who xsde

he eecented, When Rafeel arrived,

Sendship which l-ter led 2 ihe attenoted recruicment, In the

Usd tatreduced CAiSKISE Xo aNINis and now regretted at,

(this qed ante 2 whither conversetion about the SOBs nd ZL asked hin ebout CHICHXOV).

Ee said that he bas worked foe CHICESCY ¢ thet he: chad no. ie- thet CEICKOV vas

X63, CHICHESY had never madi any pttensé. to recruit hin for: .enythine, Re
KOV by first n-né. But could not.

a“

later ME: tion ed ‘tht ke right knot: VOSXCSc3

"be sure of tha last neme, (Ir dident try to deseribe hin), Subject mentioned

OTA ae Aeneas ete WE tteenE IR enim! merece

| cece id, other Soviets who sre KG3 during - + fast moving conversation but I did not teke
H : : :

notes, My sin was’ the reeruttinent ana I tried to keep the corversation channeled.
ete > ee ad

! fee?’ Ube” toxards thet vera. Dusing- the cor

ersstion Sub: ect seid thet at one ting his -  --

other had < c dod da bin thet they hod tried to recruit b ner ssvoral times in .

}
i
!
Hi
ob
i
i

Koso: to work ageinot Spapic rds and Latin Ancticans who visited, The 5G3
b ad once threet tened her but: whan she contained that she would consult her husbend,
they told her to £03 reget it. He said th- t she hed ‘known. many nanbers of the NVD,

SSVD and nox EGS, but that sha still refuses to work for then in their business.

Atter considerable nore discussion along the seme lines.. Subject finely

thought a bit, ond, said that he ‘would agree to vork with mé on one cond4: tion

orly, . The condi : as that tf vould rot 23k tis te dnfora ‘on, or work agrinst,

ary os his frdends or students, including Cli, VENTURA or ANDREA: in pe rtieuler,

end tht if ary thing showld happen | to hin ssa result of his = work for me, thet

Z vould promise to take care of his wite and oh, I agreed ‘to his consitdon,,

. -Pestating tht xy only concern was the x63, I I said hovever thet dn the future if. -

; . ol . .
4 “i could prove to hin, oF sonvince his, that exy of his local eccusintences were
:
!

étrectly involved with the KGB then I would excect hin to bclp ne,

Sh eta me ernest en esos ene ene etre ae



--- Page 119 ---
ort date with LOGL.OY act 1526,

révul that he cocstnt chonze

nis attdtude one bit, and to continus Toh the tind. boing vith LOGENOY Just os
at old pre higpencd, I sia tht the Soviste do have a dopertzrent...

if nothi,

at this he ‘interrupted and ‘sedd "SLGRSEM and grinned, T seid yes, they do

oporate. now s ond then, and that the Sovicts would not be very heey to discover
that their friend he ‘4 anything at ail t to do with | us, I said that even ‘though _

we treat each other &s gontlexen. they are capsdle of © boing: to eh at times,

. Ko said not te worry, the t he was an excellent actor, and LOGINOVY would never

suspect a thing.

During the tine Iwas trying to convirice hin, ho said that I veg
forgetting one thing. He assured me that he was 865 Socizlist ard 20% capitelist,
end he. firnty believed that Socdelisn was good. for soite countries. including |

“Rassie, He said that because or thet he didint see how I could ever have eny

confidence in hin; IZ enswered by saying that everyone wes entitled to their
Adeals, and Istoo belt oved in certain forms or Soeirlisz, he encouraging thing ©
wes that he believed din sorothing, od that was bis right es an individual,

we in the Uv, 8 are entitled to our ‘beliefs, ard are not restricted an our reading

netter or thet we said on sr eet corners, If he wanted to, he could stand on

“the! steps of the Lincoln omaent and ‘give a spéack on soci-lisn arid no’ one

would bother hin provided. he didnt cause a riot, disturd the veesi or broax some _
decal des, we have Socdalists tho are stad good citizens. 6 then talked

a Little about the restrictions 4n Russi in reading netter and talking. bet

saw wy point,

_ By 2115 we wore in agreenont ‘en his seopsration with ne involving

the above mentioned conditions, I asked hin-to mect me on “ednesday, 5 Febrec
at 31636 et CEALUPAS Restaurant on Reforma (gest across the Pord*erico), Eo

know where St was and agreed to nect me, I ceutioned him ecein te be very vare el

°
o*
°
*
>»
&
4
Hh
©
a
re
PSI
<i

in bis dealings «ith LOGINGY and to talk:

precattiers ‘he r he can



--- Page 120 ---
PAAR EMERITUS INET RN SMRE Ain CNL Ga ERY ma

TTL ee a

PP LmS A Capen a MOREY tere EIS HES aM Net emRIND oe ate

teeta

AE ORE. aa WER de na ensendn@ at imet

wn tbe ye ee

. ™

‘I ssid thet even though a wouldnt +

vust prior vo lesving

he ssid he was going,

ht havo beon ClLLS), Mas sri? tht he

would net cry a werd, even to his nother ob wife, Ye lest ths restaus nt

ru unk wath hin, but

at 22.5, ne wanted to give mee ride, or Rave me go get

adiat mind 40, thet three o° my essoctates were

waiting ebent three blacks ae oy ter cg FeROrT, and thet Thad to toll them

whet Lepoened,,, they were very sixibas about this, ve parted in the doomay .

and-ha drove off as I walked da the other-direst fon, I lester caugat a cab to

"town aad lett didn the vicinity of ny car,

|
™
+
1
i

; another aogroach produced @ Littl 1é result. Tt think thst stor assessnents which .

_ State tt
recuiiment 4s staal on thin dee, and s\ bgect ads serious about involving his:
friends, Perhaps after he gets Ris feet wet (Fat laste wet hong) ard hes
some cxoertence ke can be Brou-tt arcend te do aimest anything,

During the conversstion Subdgect nentioned the nmes 0! vardous
Soviets, but I was not takis ng notes and pro: ‘erred to channel the conversetdon.
back to the rocruitnent piten. i thought the details could-be obtained lster

sruited,

‘Dering the pitch the only one who was nervous was x6. Subject displayed

a "cool" which was amazing, “hen I presented my erecentiels and the pitch he

never batted an eyelash), ,just conte muc2 slightly smiling, I noted no reaction

atall, it could, 2.be that ke still thought i was kidding, or pleying somo gome,-

adnirsble point, 0. 2 ae Loge - .
we (I) talked | froa 1700 to sbout 2030 with Rout raking any herdvay,

‘Up until thet time I hed gotten an exphatic ANON, I slnost gave up before

x tke Retr éo anything, for money is entircly. Talse.

at the menent the

Weg

:



--- Page 121 ---
‘
4
d
:
i

2 eT tee o
hep ER Bay rl
“

while hovever I wor.

peosie, Resublidean |

me RA Mey

reflections on hts fr » (lott or not)

Sprniants in genersh, or anything else thet he urs expressed a do" inite

opinioa on, If el) of tha Yoregring-da-ser lly legitinste, the sucress: 0

the recruitment so far bas been due to “riendapin ard ay villineniess to see

ni3 WAlh ‘teke tine to chanzo,

gust about everything bis wey,

“Serie Jy Kertasult .

foe ce

eae. o
J

t
g



--- Page 122 ---
G. wt we, aoe Ga 68

MeN. fist bods

4 Ae Lee arenes

B

van ea S. 54D ovetee. bie. 6 ee

: —,
wine

oe renee we “fi red rb ye

— te So eT we z
£

tel, megeyee loos

hace

Lee SP EERE Mo

AFA Secale CHEER OT EL BAIS BZ E,



--- Page 123 ---
ae nt nn tt an eget eatvan : _
¢ Y s c %, * ,
ON : .

4

FS tttien a ete baia pernaaa em niantaen sy

&

- Po - JE.

nol, Wee

~ US CD ° i ~



--- Page 124 ---
30 January 1969

MEMORANDUM FOR: C/ouba
FROt 3. C/IC , Co SO
: SuByECT 3 LIREALY-1'6 Soviet Contacts at the French Club”

ae + Fithout encouraging any furthor contact between LIREALM-1. ~
and the Soviets but Binply taking advantage of the fact that he.
does continue to see them, I would apprectate continuing information
- on the following points;

a, Anything new learnod about the activities of LOGINOV
: and CHERNISH, evon the fact that they were at the club for —
certain hours oa certain dates, with whon | they played tennis” ™
or talked, ete..

i b, Any indications that either LOGIHOV or CUERNTSA have
any interest. in anyone at the club.

. ce. Continudag assessment ‘and biographic data on Gloria
PINTO and her hiéband with the view of f approiching both | or
either.

a a 4 would: also appreciate a detailed assesment of LOGINDY
based oa the relationship to date. The same. tor CHERN ISH.

3, As KGB off icers both are of priority interest.

ae f- HD)

i



--- Page 125 ---
SA REE YE” CASE pe

tr
i
i
ty
eo
<a
i
a

1. Following a choné cali fron Subject, I me
; heteZ room fer lunch. The seeting lasted fra 2353 35 until Homa i
16C0. The next meeting will be arranged by phone when en Subje 2 is 2)
Back in Mexico City. : ; ae
2. Duriag the past moath, Subject was 212 withee ED 3
*ollowdng recovery, Smnt. all of his tine on busine atiers
rather ‘than. on subjects of operational intérest. As usual, he is
up to his ears in financial woes, though he just discover ed that -
his position is not nearly as bad as he thought. P.-

3. Subject ‘said he thinks Polish Ambassador RASCHRZAK Uae
_may come to visit hin. in Cueraavaca this Sunday, though” Plans are
not definite, I urged him again to get busy courting MAJ, a bit”
nordaggressively and not to let the relationship’ grow cold. ;
Subject said ‘that the reason he has not been more active lately
is that Lolita is in the early months of Pregranty and has not |

been feeling “up to any 2 ZAP ee; scale entertaining.

/?-
4. Yesterday afternoon, el January, Subject ran into |

Valentin LOGINOV at “Florencia and Hamburgo. ‘They exchanged brief
greetings and LOGINOV ‘commented ne have had a very geod beginning
of the year," (whatever that neans). pag ‘| 7 : /

- 5e Subject "recently received a7 Post | card froa BEWEER

fe sew:

“advising that _BEWSEP has-seen Subject's s{ster’ in 2 Wasaw, sothing:

6 Subject said that hay secretary has bean locking for an |

Yve: P £792

Ayn

hore than this other than routine greetings, ; co i

wee



--- Page 126 ---
—— . ars aw
Sechert . ale Atl}
\ AS SCO
10 JANUARY 1968
MEMORANDUM FOR THE FILE , ; :

SUBJECT: Valentin Sergeyevich LOGINOY (F-11712)

On 46. December 1968 LICALLA. reported that a “Light-complextoned
‘woman had entered thé Soviet Embassy grounds at AIO6 that day.
She wes seen exiting at 1122 hours: While iaside. the ‘Soviet Rabesey:
grounds, this wonaa Had contact with Subject. (LOGENOV). :

-LILYRIC reported thet on that same: “date, 16 December 1968, “an _ r .
_ unidentified 1ight-complexioned woman had entered the Soviet Embassy . a
; at 1106 hours. She was exiting at 1122 hours. She was driving a : of
: car with D.F. plates 964 RC. LIKAYAK reported on 7 Januar 1969 ----.
that these. piates were registered to: .

, Raquel“ URTULER ‘de*DALLAL.
a Residence: Rio % 95-1
: Mexico 5, D.F.

: They are registered to a 1965 Opel Sedan.

There are no Station Traces on the woman cited above.
Attached sre photographs of the woman seen in contact with L6ctiov, 3
as 3 well as _ the LIKAYAK Placa check results. . ‘

Grace H. FARMILANT

meenes RM 2.


--- Page 127 ---
. . . . <a os /
. <4 aay y
° “urnyerc- ¥-2920 /¢ AE G& :
, THIS WOHAN WAS SREN ENTERING CLUB ST 1105 HOURS. SHE ASRIVED IN.A CAR WITH -

D.F. FLACAS 904 FC (being checked): ACCORDING TO LICALLA, A BLONDE WOMAN
“WHO WAS SEEN ENTERING AT SAME TIME HAD CONTACT WITH VALENTIN S. LOGINOV CPL1712)5
KNOWN KGB OFFICER. ACCORDING TO L@CALLA THIS WOMAN EXITED AT 1122 HOURS, WHICH oo

- °° 1S SAME TIME LILYRIC HAS WER EXITING.

SLB Date a

SSN Ne dette



--- Page 128 ---
-”

fe

ae

os

Le

=

- it

we

*

of

a ry f > mo

A eo. 2 dl

.* my . 4

' 1
: i
|
ct



--- Page 129 ---
gE
}

“

XONAR totale +



--- Page 130 ---


--- Page 131 ---
. wo oe nos . ° st 2
ely meee “TRS nemcentnen ne bee a Sash Meme ramnsame ween

fee: Mh

México Dy F. a 7 ae & de 1969,

ASUNIC. Liacas : de
. oo vi

‘A Guien Sorremyonda

FRESHER:

i]
od
i
4
!

_ a Me Prernito Anforsar el resultado de. la tnvestinnet de las -
placas Que enseruida especifice.
at ; . .
¥ Vaca ye 964-P0-Fertenece & un coche Opel seddn Fartioular modelo 1965
we . F...
2121 con canje de placag pn 1963 a nombre de Raguat URTULER
, LC St

ieee
las calles de Rio Poo Ne 95 interior i de la

I

ree . i
eh ee ee ee /



--- Page 132 ---
14-0000

; 2A Gy . Ve Licelb ;
(i a 1223 Du 1753 vs ;

; ms . ; i 4
i i . . ob .
MASro01 ya Wy oad papeéor. arribs al Clud. un satrLaonto nuavo, aiaz0 us olacifio00 00:10

OL ys i) 2 » Upirsce ontro otras fotos on leo re .1,2,22,12 922,23 7 24 dol R-3=2313 ¢

tions confaote cont Kay! Ap, Por sora xov,or y Xol y fola, prinodpalmonte :
oon estos 2 Wtiaos, poalolosente so quade on lugar do ellos. -

LA beter

im Hoy onposnroa 6 trabajadoron a roparar. y ‘plator aiganea salones dar
intorior dol Edificio, ~~~ oe

a3

No eoguido viendo a.2 7913273 442 39 onotionsran va “WSxléo doada ol nfs do
Octubre, oatos sujatoa ontro, stra fotog aparsoon on las s2 30 y 32 aol
Rollo C= 2313...”

A las 3200 Ua. un Eoubro y 2 tujorsa al puraoor oxtranjeros, sali 4oron dol ~

Clud por le raja principal, an ol Rooddidor baviaron oontacte cons Font.

ot . one neenemenener en . - .
a - :

A loa 1122 Hig. una ‘lujor zubia ‘¥Y quo vast. do solor. vordé x walla nachos
galadeo, sali dal club por la roja prineipal, la cujr ametonada ontré a
dud 2106 Mae ¥ on al Rroioidor tuvo costae panto. _— ,
— am & tiny, AG (Ae. ao KO ie — .

emer

Kate aks on un onralSa. de las tus. WSS ‘Jovallou" wanes Varios suablog.

usados que peatdluamte avan para hn Ouua, eB a voitar al tty * a

eu foaliia, — —

Px gesh shana ties! Lye

: | 77 frecoibet PbO

LE _ _peowe: heewhtr



--- Page 133 ---
|
b

1 aes cana semana ce eaten pret eat eee

ee coe ee _ :
COnTACT AUPORTE x (T—1)! pa
SURTNT: LERODINAD and 2 a ? = (a2)
DATE OF MEETING: 4 Decenber 19538 :

1. The undersigned met with LIROBIN/L and 2 at-the LI ROLIN apartment

. on-& Decenbar from 1213. to 1300 hours. . Tho next eating will occur.

yo
|
i

SHMANM via telephone.

when one of the LIROSH ‘ contacts Rul

“2, LIRODIN/2 reported’ that both of the LIROBINS attended a cocktail
ewe

party at the home of the Indian Embassy | Stor (7), PKU PARASHAR,

at which they met the LOGINOV!s , (Po11712) 6 LOGINOV again refused to

- carry on any of’ the conversation in English ‘even thougt English was the

comzon. language used by the guests. At ono point during the evening,

. NS. “PARASHAR addressed LOGINOV in frent of all the guests and enided
him for not using his English renarking that"everyone chere knows that
you speak English". -LOGINOV staréd at her icily, but did not comment

- in either Spanish or Biglish. LOGINOV spoke briefly with L/1 inquiring
what L/1's éuties, were with the newspaper and ‘gave every indication that
“he was unavare of Wits ‘column. Hrs. LOGINGY was quite cordial and
inquired if we had been, to the: film festival in Acapuleos 1/2 replied
that she had not to. which, Hrs. LOGIKOV ‘countered by ronarking that she

"had seen L/2ts friends - the SARATOVS (P-13125)= at. Acapulco. W/2 stated

that no effort was rade to involve the LOGIi NOV! s, in polemics during ‘the.
evening and that. Locinov did not appear to Iaiow the majority of the

* approxinate 16 guests “who represented ‘alnost every nationality. The
OY

LIRCBIN's wera the only: Aneriésns! with the exception of Edward KE

and his Nexiean wife. Locrioy did not ssend dn inordinate time vith any

particuls: idadividual nor ‘aid they romain late. . a

rar

3. adh itionsd nforantion was obtained re arnold ELLGUAn which

HTeMMAME wilh fashten into < rencrt. Vho Kuisouiits ave iavites to

Giaher-as the Livelsh'a on 6 Gecenber tosetnex tite the biG wilS aha atl
HOD. La NSD
eee etn “AEE

a rman eRe ee me eet

sivas



--- Page 134 ---
oe

$<) of serhan:
Gloria would encourage | ‘an afta
terest in val is pro ably that of everyone else's, as a

Soviet, he is a novelty. He is aiso prote ly attractive

to women who Like brutish ren. Sloz
warried to a very sor Ftaspoken “asd con teexat persone

ie scoray CONCCeES

ility of ana

nas enterteainec

Val has sooxen ently of his interest
iris. Gloria could easil eas oxuad arget Zor Val--

of course...
cher, Gioria organizes tennis groses and int
Through her Mal is Lik Kely to meat a?

at Val would try to res"
joy-a fairly luxcrious
ul. ohysician. ‘
€n noua to becos

re seoxs highly unld kely
Fruit either Gloria or Pepe.

=
ly

is Gevozince

OWse



--- Page 135 ---
Ae ei nite tg Ae evant age

oA coat ene mse anna nnn starsat

APOUT TRE US, I Believe | the
merican than the average:

She bas travelled to the US many t
shopoins. ; She ikniows ‘the U2 rat rer well, but she éces not™

OF GLORIA. Ioan convinced
zy WOK é ight

RECRUIT.

neves

alue to

B36.

Fave insufdicient
rolete PRO OT

could exchance
an oraer _toO ofeein

sary

the neces



--- Page 136 ---
ET A A NaI IRS MEE cf

“nS: @ very handsoxa little boy.

wite will be te

Gloria Pinto |. an
mier Z1, 1958. bet =

- eo Cloraa talking to Tourt
thom. Gloria was turning oa all of
charm. oreuieod Touri t6 her pocsads, s
ehould gas at the Soviot embasuy about | business Ga. aL
she bud, Waa told thin would be Ivanov. Gloria said she
JRnew hibi and deacriied him as big aad corpulant. A pPPALEA
thia waist correct=-acording to. Tour ife reaction, .

G Loria ankod Leurt where - ho worked and. war told with.

Valentin. le adved ‘that this: is tha: Gepar rient you sust
come to 1f ou, want to vigit the Sovict Unions >.

. Later I saw Iouri with his wife and sone She is rather
at tractive, tail. Pavel, is arcut three years old, aad

LATE OF IxroRtatros: Decenikes 23, 1968. 2000 ° = 0200 hours
RED? Poscaa, at Glozials

and -his wi nd dhout 40

elioicus. |

Gloria invited us to spond, next weexond with hen and
3 or -4 cther cousles. at Valis Bravo. Voleatin ene his
Co Wo-accepta 2

i . us

S.wite brought ptrojxi-~ |

Sar ase ea Seals



--- Page 137 ---
ccs Wet miciean | as _ A NL.

oe . , ‘Cue (ES : corn fauna 4 hee .

fo AE finer Ate d

G riaFprnto, tennis companion of vatentio LOGINOV.

1. “A: vedumé of: their relationship.—is attitude. towards, : a:
° _her, hers to bin. Any dadicationg of sexual involvement? os
‘| vA ‘2, Bio data on. _Pihto, marital relationé, ageesenent of
her, could she be approached: to talk about her relationshtp
with LOGINOV, hov, through who? toe :

tee va hk. ets}
, prea e. Peeswnt aclictes L
a bch. =

a

cecne ees nein eaten te ae cee:

a2

u\ eam Yow ew each Ys avsot ar

| . iN) Aw 7

: / U :

i : .



--- Page 138 ---
ee,
¢ ‘REED -4 fee

0. Sind fo

tad 4



--- Page 139 ---
00000

o yt a
; . FARE ALA
re 3
interes: in Valentia, SZULNOVe da a date
with Val to olay tennis ac the French Club. Toay ace
miteed to Kiac quite én effort to keen nis date, .
desnite cther ommittxents which had come un. Val,
however, did not show and cid not ¢all tony. Tony
Scened far more oyed than would be normal under - ‘
“the eireunstance: ; -
CONY'sS FATHER, ANERICAN. Tony has a large’ famtly ~
coe here and in ‘tho U is father is an American-and Tony | :
boo S Soeaks oxcalléat @ is very ¢riendly, well- : :
| ; i Liked, pra-USil, e: at tennis player.
| . ,
I. a
:
3
o. . - . &
H ne = 7 : noe 8 ~ L
j ; . q a
. ‘ . a
| %
: 4
. 4
i .Y
i a
&
. re
2



--- Page 140 ---
14-0000

beta DepeerS7 > teen = tafe Mite: |
| ane a

cor tact EEPor?

-
suntcots LINOSBINS/1 {Lyi 66D .°

vas

i
4
: QATE OF HEUEIEG: IM Kovesber 1968

o

mo, ade, The undersigned met with ‘LIROBEIRY/A & at his apartment on.
1 oveabor from 1500 to 1630 hours. LIROBUIN ‘$72 was 411 in bed (flu)
and vas. unable to participate in this necting. The LIROBSINS ‘S daughter, a
Lisa, was: present. in the house. during the neoting which prompted REIDSMANN
i.) inquire of Wi if the daughter was DUEXKX aware of the type of res
lationship which’ the LIROBBINS had with RSIDSMANN, W1 replied that
"they" had told thaéir daughter inasmuch as she had come to suspect such
, a relationship over the past. year or sd. RSIDSNANN felt that it would be

Fy
3
H
4

of Little purpose,at this time, to admonish the LIROBEINS and: -dropped the -
_ Subject.  RBIDE WANN has found the LIROBBINS to be woefully lacking in-
; general security principles and has strived,in a tactful manner, to point.

out past shortcomings and possible security Rasards ~ especially with

regard to. “telephone conversations. . : - ay
. 2. Tn response to RSIDEMANN's question regarding attendance at the :
_? Novenber, reception, L/1 stated that they had both attended. L/1 come
nented that there apzear red) tower people this. year than last.. As a matter
of fact, Ll could ‘sdentaty- only ‘two ‘people in the entire. throng. that he
had previously known. They were: the Indian Exbassy Counsellor (2),

Fu PARASHAR and an Anerican couple, Lulu Vargas-Vila @o0 LEE (wife),
vho is the: “correspondent for La tnion (Walparaiso); La Prensa (Buenos
itres) 5,2 Bl: ‘tienbo (Bogota) and res sides at Platon Uk5 — 2nd floor, :
ols 2010783. The LIROSLINS spoke briefly with both of the above . - ,
parties as !well as SARATOY (P-13125) 5” SYCHSV (®_11113), LOGINOV (P-21712) :
so PALS xO (P-2 270). The conversation adhered to generalities such as

~~) o najority of the guests ae

2? YY) 22272 oy)



--- Page 141 ---
aaa eratiianeen emer ee ee

appeared to, be Mexicans - a \ darze muaber of them clad in thoir overy-

. ay clothes. ‘Thera was also a sprinkling of Mexican student~apnearing

types. ‘For the-record, L/1 Tepor rted that his automobile is a 1965 |
blue, two-door, Oldsmobile bearing Oklahoma licenso Plates, 15-8546

“(1968 plates), |

3. With reference to SARATOV!s party on tho ovening of 13 November,
L/2 comented that he and L/2 arrived at the party at approximately ;

- 2000 remaining until ca. 0030, 14 November. The LIROBBINS were! ‘the

last to’ leave although they departed only minutes after the rest of the
guests. The guest list included: The LIRODBINS, arnold B11g0re. nd.

_ wife JoAnne, Roger “CUDIEY (Radio. VIP) and wife, and the Saratovs«
. hoger

English was the common language spoken and l/l noted that both the

. Saratovs handled the language with ease althcugh as the evening progressed

ard SARATOV' idquor consumption inereased his fluency and articulation
became more labored . -I/1 stated that SARATOV pushed liquor very hard
the entire evening starting out with two pre-dinner drinks andthen .

‘ serving vodka in accoripaniement to the borsch.. Wine was served with the
. . i

nain course, Chinese beef, prepared by Natd&liya SARATOVA. Dessert was
accompanied with brandy and the evening progressed with long drinks afger

_ “dinner, “L/l stated that SARATOV drank with the group” a though Wi doubted —
~ that SARATOV matched the men drink for drink, Mrs. SARATOVA appeared

at ease and seeried to enjoy the conversation. L/1 assessed her as a

. woman who complemented her husband and nade a charming and. vivacious
lapnearances L/l. seened to be struck with SARATOV's apparent"sincori ty"
_An dw his enjoyment of the evening and his "candor" in the discussions.

For the nost part, the conversation edged. away from any controversial
subjects; _ seoningly all ware content to dwell upon "Old Nexico" of 20
years ago and the joys of sizple living in the city. During a discuss ion
of the style of night Life in Moxico, SARATOV remarked that he enjoyed



--- Page 142 ---
14-0000

3 7

a

.

a good strip=tedse performance nov and then relating that he had. seen

:  vuber of then whon he was in tho States. SiRATOV spoke nostalgically

Q

of nis lifo in the States admitting that ho wissed many aspects of his
iigo there. “Wi remarked that tho cor, wwersation was largely centered
around comments by the BILGORES and Wi and L/2 inasmuch as the cuongys *
were very reserved and seldom expressed themselves to any degreee L/1
commented that to the best of his knowledge the CUDNEY's ad SARATOV's
had first met and the dinner party held by “the LIROBSINS. W1 expressed
some surprise in that the: CUDNZY's- were davited as they are rather , , .
shy and inexpressive. Toward the end of the évening, WL ‘was able ‘to oo

7 : , “patse ‘the question of the. Sotiet invasion of the CSSR. SARATOV staunchly —

: defended the Soviet and Warsaw Pact occupation claiming that it was a

necessary move because of the increasing aggressiveness of the West
Germans and that the avowed purpose of West German: truculence was to put

pressure on both the CSSR and East Germany in hopes of reunifying Germanys

: SARATOV did not become enotional over his defense, but left little doubt

LT a

the BILGORE's or the LIROBBINS pursued the issue although L/1 commented

|

{

4

}

|

| that he wholeheartedly approved of tho Soviet move into the CSER. Neither

i

|

t to SARATOV that he was not convinced ty SARAYOV's defense of Soviet actions. +
{

In short, l/l felt that the evening went off smoothly and as the LIROBBINS. “ co

on _ departed SARATOV walked thei dow the steps and solicitously inquired of
, Wi as to whether they (SARATOV' s) had entertained properly ami if ali 7
had been satisfied with the SARATOV''s production. L/1 found this” vaguely
out of keeping vith SARATOV's personality and somevhat gauche. L/1 noted
thet the SARATOV apartment was modern and well-kept giving every evidence
of having been lived in. ‘he SARATOV's possess a large European make i

combination phono-radio- set which was tuned to. light FN music for back~ ;
Ground. SaXuwTOV stated that ho had inhorited this from his predecessor. oa

EARATOV's one child (age 9) vas’ in bed when the guests arrived. Upon |
. Gerarting, SARATOV: dnquired of the LIAGBLINS if they planned to attend tho

cents oe renee ae eae RR



--- Page 143 ---
‘

forthcoming Acapulco film festival. 1 stated that he was not sure

if he would journey there and SARATOV stated that he and his wife planned

‘

Rone ee ee Lenina
.

to attend. oo
"4, LIROBSIN/L stated that during a recent conversation which he 3

shad with ‘Stratforg’ JONES (US citizen representing AP in Mexico), JONES”
eonnented that ne knew both SARATOV and SYCHEV. JONZS remarked that

he had been to a party at SYCHEV's curing tho Olympics. #iXE- Further-
more, JONES related that he knew the KUCHEROV's (TASS) and that Mrs.
psiiuonered KUCHEROV had beon, sent hoe before tho departure of KUCHEROV. -
JONES strongly implied that security reasons wore behind: the. rather -
abrupt departure of Mrs. KUCHEROV. I/1 did not press: the issue any

tenant cn Neel athens

further. a . . . : .
Se LIROBBIN/1. also reported that the Foreign. Press Club. in in a . oo a

!

|

| “chaotic ‘state in that the president, Jose QUEROGA , has accused the club , an
che oo _ adirector, Kathorine NANJARREZ, of embezzling | funds. The truth of the 7

| m 4 7 , matter, however, seems to be that QUIROGA is. ‘engaged in either Shady

'

dealing or is. guilty of sloppy administration of finances. At any rate,
I/1 commented that all nembers must’ pay cash for all services and that

the club's creditors are pushing fur cash payments of all services. The CG

"seandal”" seens to have shaken’ the ‘club and many members are staying

corrected .

away until the financial situatio
6. The undersigned inquired of 1 as to whether ‘he. knew of any.

ts citizens who might be_ ooking for an apartment. L/1 stated that Ee
he was currently unaware of anyone, desiring housing but that he would
eep his ear S open and make a few discreat inquiries without revedliing —

| ee that he knows of any vacancies, | ,

i ; 2 . . N . o ;
ay) ja ho

/ROLROS N. REILDEMAN



--- Page 144 ---
00000 « . °

= ; SECRET

we ee . 13 November 1968 -

MEMORANDUM FOR: DC/ 1C/SB

i VIA : Chief of- Station .
: d : _ C/I so : ~ .

: SUBJECT. |  : Consular Corps Visit to Veracruz ; 7 : : 2

i an : 1. The undersigned visited Veracruz on 9 and 10 November =

; _ together with other members of the Consular Corps on an

re ' official visit to that city. ‘Although the Cubans were :

H scheduled to attend and official diplomas proclaiming then 1"

: guests of the City of Veracruz were prepared, none of them co

_ Showed up, including Lino SALAZAR Chia, who is stationed in . f
Veracruz. The Czechs, East Germans, and Poles for a number ,

: - of reasons also failed to go on this trip. Thus, the only :

of - Communist representative was Valentin Sergéyevich LOGINOV, ™

a te with whom the undersigned had plenty of opportunity to talk.

It seems that LOGINOV, at least’ for public consumption, .

_ considers the undersigned "his friend." LOGINOV was accompa-
nied by~ his wife, .

i
1

: poe ” 23 The following were. the main points of interest
: : discussed, by LOGINOV: - . .
i

i

a. The Soviet appeared very anxious to get.

. the undersigned's opinion on a subject to which he
kept going back time and again during the visit:
the position ‘Of the. Ri¢hard NM. NIXON administration’

> vis-a-vis ‘Communist China. Specifically, what :

LOGINOV wanted to know was what the chances are ara

that the NIXON administration might attempt to bring A

_about a rapprochement between Communist China and : Q
the United States. LOGINOV approached this topic Coo
from various directions, and the undersigned had : os 4
the distinct impression that he had received a : . S
At one point,

of Communist China .
his. government is. . son

with developments - 4

specific query. on this subject.
LOGINOV stressed’ the importance
to his country, “indicating. that
becoming increasingly concerned
there. 7 : ;

SECRET

Pouwa



--- Page 145 ---
i
{
:
}
i

: i
SECRET
-2-

: b. Connected with: the above was LOGINOV's
concern for peace in Victnam..- For the first time
that the undersigned can remeber, a Soviet stated
‘that the United States and his country had "a
common interest of utmost importance" in bringing
peace to Vietnam.- That the Soviet interest may

‘:;be conhected with their concern. about Communist
‘China was indicated by LOGINOV when the latter
‘indicated that peace should be obtained in Vietnar
as a way te keep out the Chinese Communists. ;
This did not prevent LOGINOV from making the usual
noises in favor of the National Liberation Front
and the Vietcong, blasting away at South Vietnamese
militarism.

c. While talking about the Miadle East,
-LOGINOV said that the Soviet Union was in the
Mediterranean to stay and fully interded -to give
such support to the Arab nations in that area as
to someday "get rid of Israel." LOGINOV specifically
Stated, "The Jews have it coming to them, and the
day of reckoning is coming." The undersigned was
curious to-know whether this was prompted on
. LOGINOV's part by. a--dislike of the Israelis or an
anti-Semitic feeling. LOGINOV was quite blunt and
‘categorically stated that he for onc "hated all
Jews," and ‘did not hide his profound anti-Semitism.
LOGINOV ‘added that Jews are parasites who have.
little nationalism other than that generated by the
Zionist cause. ‘He implied that those Jews left in
‘the Soviet Union are foreigners who. have done little
- to help thé Soviet cause. The undersigned pointed .
out that anti-Semitism has been a long Russian
. tradition, dating. back to before the Revolution,
ae + and deplored this obvious discrimination. _He added
: that this reminded him of the anti-Semitism of the
party which not ‘so. long ago made mass murder of
Jews a matter of national policy. . .

d. It took LOGINOV about one day to briag. up
the Sucesos para Todos article. The undersigned
jokingly asked him whether this was a Soviet or.
Cuban sponsored joke, saying that rumor had it that
‘Sucesos was financed by both the Soviets and the

SECRET

Ae TE Re RETER Tenn



--- Page 146 ---
SECRET

-3-)

.Cubans. LOGINOV denied this, saying that the staff
of Succsos could not be put by any stretch of the
imagination into the category of "Communists." He.
then point- -blank asked the undersigned whether he
belonged to the organization mentioned in the
article. The undersigned laughingly answered that .
if ‘such trashy publications as. Siicesos were believed.
by anyone "of couxse he belonged to that organization."
LOGINOV laughed and made a few more noises about how
Sucesos obtained the undersigned's name. The latter’
replied that his name was probably selected at
‘random from stolen pages of the Embassy directory

or other such document. ‘He added that if LOGINOV
had wanted his phone number he would have been glad
to have given it to him rather than see it appear
in Sucesos. .

e. The discussion the undersigned had with
LOGINOY in Guadalajara about the KGB was apparently
not forgotten by the Soviet, for the latter pulled ' os
out of his purse a copy of the stamp commemorating |: ;
some KGB anniversary that the undersigned had - a
mentioned to him. The undersigned has no idea vf.-;
the reasons for this gesture. One of the topics
which seéms to embarrass LOGINOV the most is the
humber of visas he signs at the Soviet Embassy. . uv
Whenever LOGINOV gets a little too pointed in his ie
provocations, the undersigned raises this subject,
with LOGINOV invariably. giving a little laugh and |
no. answer.

: | £. LoGrNov indicated that he. was. aware ‘that 7
the ‘undersigned had met with Jiri SVESTKA at the Pos
time of the Soviet intervention, in. Czechoslovakia | = :

’ and asked for his opinion of SVESTKA. The undersigned
made ho bones about the fact that -he had a long lunch
with the Czech. He said he had found hin to be vmuy
de la izquierda,." adding that unfortunately SVESTKA |.
belonged to the very small minority of his country
which had -wolcomed Soviet intervention. The under=- :
‘signed predicted that the Soviets would have con+ | oe
Siderable trouble with Czechoslovakia and pointed :
out that this serious error had tarnished the cause:

SECRET



--- Page 147 ---
. mo ™, SECRET
weep ee . wd
i ; oo .
dE of the Soviet Union. He said, for example, that
an oe the Soviet interventiea was very unpopular in Mexico.
a .This seemed to draw a little blood from LOGINOV, ‘as .
i : he abruptly interrupted the undersigned and asked, |
— _ . _ “Where. is it popular?" ~ ° . so :
Raymond A, FRADYER
f .
}
1
{ .
| ‘Distribution:
‘Orig - 7 (Consular Corps) .
j ons oe Qe p-11712 (LOGINOV) :
1 ‘+ P7111 (SVESTKA) . 2
: 7 . . :
} oo :
} - RAF: 1lmp . aa
4 an . *
| %
7 . a
| . a
i . 2
| : Q
: 3
H . -_* a
i : 2.
a . Fs
&
:
Hy
* 2
. ;
SECRET f



--- Page 148 ---
| ROD Sige Tilly |

Rasen:

ae 2
VET LOTS
\

Bars
Uaed

CP XcEt

eet peed
ASOT SS

The

, ole
on.15 October from 1600 to 19730 hours.
1

REIDEUNS would de out of. the,

PL SOS ES Kee OY

that
accordingly, wate requested to contact

information which thoy deen 3

&.. LIRQDSIN/S vesorted &

Golivesed aa invitation to the LIROSSIND to attend a reception a

i | Soviet Exnbassy fo? the Soviet Olympic

and yisit with the LIROBZINS but merely

cree

LIROSEINS to attend, Soth the 2

poorly organized and

LIRGEDINS state

City comamity. . Sha

¢ i Journalists and racsognised no other guests with ¢ ception of a
. movie star/cirectoz, antlio PERNANDOZ (#21 Indo") and wife. Duting the
’ . . .
reception, LIRCSSIN/2 sav GAS.20V approached the LIRGZEINS

nd apolosized for the fact that he nad
been extronely

~ ate . ars oe
to the eizsors

LIROESINS ths

MO STE OSES
SM LIROEDING/L

perishable and of urgency. .

(2.2270)
% tne
team. PRIXEODHO did not come in

at approximately 1930 and dezarting about 2130.
shaves were few people in attendance fSrox

sha

Snat they wore the only Anerican

i
.
nn Dok bh ery erare
Ge oc Su Vaclo Gpartmens

Gae LIROSEIVS were informed

Zor the next tuo weexs and,

Late Oa snould

they obdtat

fh

mage out an invitation

for tae

wwended the Dunction
he reception was zvther
Hexico

noe been able nis f$irvye
busy with the Olympics which

every cay as well ac coing the

weey

minking tole cutics. CARATS
ah? ce me a
able promised

were over



--- Page 149 ---
14-0000

.
248 .
y- +
‘
: >
a Teception, The 1 Lis aliss vemaris with
+ LOGINOV (P.L37123 regarding the aionen wieeeene -
Olyzpics. L/l noved thes LeaINey sseke Shon fn fluent :
.
although he ha¢ preven snicito I/1 and 1/2 that he szcoxe o> .
understood Baglish, :
- - noe - - . 7 “oe a
: pw

aN °

Sot Ayes

ek Ua,

” v4

. ” 7 - :
“ CL bf telat! bt we Slew CE an . a

Xf fear



--- Page 150 ---
_" : Se: ~

-
ae)
font
»

tet

He -. Bear =oye “Rasntio 2d of

We are now here in Mexico, we know Zor sure that the

C.I.&. of the United States engineered the nilitary take-over

of: ‘the ‘Creek coverazent ang the errection of tke present

too police state that exists there.

. . 7 | rn Pera, I suspect & sindlar course of events has
; 4 ; taken place. , . 2
. : ‘ es é.
5: mg tO take over tne
ae ; ke sense that if
7 a , the miisraviate are ania to create a state o? civil
_ ; : th Gigorde: that they will be granted more power, to the
: . cue extent that they will tecone the acting governzens of
: | ne Mexico, like -the governzents s winteh-nave recently come | 7 °
. . _ tkto baing in. Greece ané Peru? “Coulen'’s the terrorist =
: 2 Q - groupa. like the. muarre" ena the so-called, "Com atats". .
yO : : oe in actuality enployees of the militarist inatitations
. . . . .
/ 7 , of this country whode purpose it, is to frustrate & :
: ‘ situetion which only the of Liter; pe96l ice state coul :
i oo control? ;
i and 2
: . « Anat qua
’ thas the
on Léateo
eA EG
. -


--- Page 151 ---
entered
NOV,

exicans
n talking to LOGI

6B ~ Two unidentified M
They wore see

t

R44) 24 Se
imbassy at 1025,
10-38, .

1

2

LILYRIC (Y=
the Soviet
and left at

te



--- Page 152 ---
nes

pyr

(LR Cp emg


--- Page 153 ---
i | .

- . oe . ae etn ats ete Rect s Rept S Mh me HE eine |

. | ; cliaiehaidhetes elk et ee a ae a te

ho : |

Rh !

i -

:

_ i .

C. | :

i _ | |
1. : 4
I :

3. oo :

8 : |

@ ‘ : |
- Y { 7
a , :

c E |

3 = “

$40 . .

rs) .

ce . |

& ¥ !

fat :

MeN A Pane em gL
ee

DONORS. thro nesclananaeeemnnaiongan "
aie cea musth



--- Page 154 ---
14-0000

screp |

oA
17 September 1968

\

SUBJECT: Telecon with LICoZY-5 on 12 Septenber i968
1. LIcouy-5 reported that Renryk SOBIESKI recently

called him and identified hinsel? as the replacement for
Jan JAKOWIEC. He said that JAKOWIEC will ‘leave in about a

had greetings from an old friend, I told LICOZ¥-5 to listen
to what SOBIESKI Says but to turn hin down ‘flat, if a pitch
is attenpted, . i ‘

: 2, LICOZY~5 also Yeported that BAKULIN and his wife
left on.10 September with the daughters of KAZANTSEV, LOGINOY
and DYAKONOV (confirmed by LICALLAY, ; ! .

-
i=]

<

»
e
a
ce
g
*
a
A
°

4

i
5

a

i-@
9

s

~
y
s
=]

a
9

3

4
"

a

o
a

7.
he
&

«
5
o

a

Francis J, COIGNR

stents oe ean pear


--- Page 155 ---
2 cn ne erent te ere nn

“SUBJECT : Soviet Travel -
‘SOURCE =; LICOZY=5"

21] August 1968

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

On 21 August 1°68 Subject reported that he has made

reservations for the following air travel rrom Mexico to

| the USSR for 10 September 1968:

a. Valentin and Vera BAKULIN (P-6059), Source

“does not know if this is PCS or TDY.

b. The daughter of Valentin LOGINOV (P-11712),

She is 16 yeara old and is returning to the USSR after
Spending the summer with her parents,

Francia J. COIGNE

P-2712 _ |. P6059



--- Page 156 ---
iéo0009 9
‘

&

|

en __. :
nen rar ttn a er i eter

' Diptribution: | L

SUBJECT: -Julio PLATAS Urbina, born 10 Gctober 1941 in Bmpalme,

' Sonora

1. It has cone to our attention that Julio PLATAS Urbina,
an agent of the Soviet KGB, is presently living in Bacobampo,

Sonora. PLATAS has been known to us Since ‘2961, when he was in

contact with Aleksander DROVKIN, a KGB officer who was then.
and etill is attached to th Soviet Embassy in Moxico City as .
a Third Secretary, In 1945, PLATAS was in contact with Yalontin
LOGINOV, a KGB officer who is a Third Secretary and Consul of :
the Soviet Embassy in Mexico, : oo

. 2. The exact nature of PLATAS's KGB assignnents is unknown

to us, but he is believed to be a courier, carrying both money ~:-
and drugs in behalf of the KGB. His courier duties are also ~-”
believed to have brought him in contact with the Communist Party

of Mexico,

3. PLATAS 1s believed to have traveled considerably through=
out Latin America, and is known to have been in Argentina and .
Great Britain in 1967, According to our information, he has just
received a new assigumont, a courier mission which may bagin as

early as 1 August 1968,

4. We would appreciate receiving the results of your inter=
rogation of PLAT.8 particularly since he ig alleged to have.

' knovledge of Soviet attempts to recruit personnel of the U.8,

Rabassy in Mexico,

V.P.RIZZUTO:wgp (2G July 1968)

Orig = LITENPO-8
1 + P6948
1 - Pe1xd0
as Pe11712 . ,
+ i t 7

i
{ :

Bo v4 on, an f -
[-hO- o> Po fe . .

7



--- Page 157 ---
su esposa Ale
Loguiney, ofre-
Heganie -recep-

cléa et miércoles por ta-no
che, en la embajada rusa.

La reuntén fae en honor
de.un grupo de amistades y
miembros del cuerpo consis
Jar, del que el sefor Logue

Leguinov, Antonio Certostme ¥ Jiri Sveste,
ka, duranto ta Loar ‘(Foto de Jaime Gonzélez) . ioe’

nov es socta active & Inte.
Brante de la mesa directiva.

También para darie la
dienvenida a su hija, jeven
3S afios, _fuien Pea de

tiyoe 0 20 Primera Plasa,

eet
Near procedente do Rusia
para disfrutar de una tempo.

rada do vacaciones en nues

tra pals.

EI sefior Logulnov hizo la-

presentacién de varios de Ica
artistas estrellas det Circo
Ruso, entre ellos al gran ma-
go Emil Kio.

Se sirvid un exquisite ene

bige con platillos tUpieos Ga.

la cocina Tusa, vinos inter
nationatra y @l impreseingt
ble vodka, :

Asistieron: lt  licenctada
Luis Alba Cefudo y sefera,
Antonio Certoino y Ema
Notn de Certasuya, Francis
Barreiet y sefiacs, David Wh
ary y su cajusa Jane. Jani
Jarowin> y ou esposg Marta
ray Paratha, au cape
Kross ula @ Alo Rabt: ; oy

SECCION B

Viernes 12 do Julio ¢o 1968.

a

seca fe Jiménez, 1 enlere
Alfonso Sibaja y Heltnida
Kusules de ja; doctor
sJaime Lourido y Candia, En-
rique Picard, Abelards Cur-
belo. Rafael Mirabal Fernsn-
dez, Gustavo Diaz, Vargas,
Liza Habelberg, Guillermo
Galesio y muchas otras per.

ponas - .
pe amend



--- Page 158 ---
i ha
‘ 8 JULY 1968,

I ran traces on the people mentioned in the.

LITEM) report attached. - Ualy identifiable
traces vere on Higinio GOMRZ (Jr.) . These

are attached. as



--- Page 159 ---
ss

Re: CALLE NEBRASKA 160

. Source Fy 3s

Dates 1 July, 1968

‘Refe: Station request, 25 gune, last,

MSxfoo, DP

2 July, 1968

Attaohed, for our retention, {5 a report on the inhabitants

of the Apt. bldg. at captiored address,

n

| ee D-b-a hy



--- Page 160 ---
LT RD OSOS A. VIVE EX EL Eul¥1C7 No, L6G RY 1aS CALLES DE

“DETO. No. Le- HUY G, SLsTouT HACTORALID? LNGLES. Nu SIGNE OCUrAS
Boe. a Chow wha Cul “I atk TiC A LA DA RACICNAL DONDE «
~ mS MUY concs.ue. TIEN “UH AUTGUOVLL ERGRRD VIEJO.

DEVTO. No. 20°F oe ho lay QUIEN ‘DE DATOS.
a’ . :
DEFTO . No. 3. MARLDO TIENE POCO DE HABER MJERTO Y ViVE

TALTRRAVEN SU

SRA

iN VOOTACTON hI VEHIQULO,

GA LS SETNOS Ay TRABAJA EN LA CONISION] 2
A ; q ‘ als KMe 33 DE LA CARRETERA @ :

EXICO ToL TIEN UN 7UTONOVIL JAGUAR PLAGAS 691-EU Y- .

UN VALIANT } DELO 1965 PLACAS 690-EU. soe

DEPTG. No.

~ DEPTO. Noe Sem_S.ie RAFAEL a S NO HAY QUIEN DE DATOS DE EL.

DEPTO. No. 6.-_LIC. AXTUR aM ano sCo@uz TEENY GU DESPACHO-EN AVE. 16-
Di SirTidans Ho, Tomaol TaN UN APNMGVIL PLYNCUTH K MOD

1966. 4 foe Fie outtiched

" DiPTO. No. 7,.<_HIGINIO GOMEZ SERRANO, DUEHO Du 1A GASA D TUBLICIDAD FOUM
: 43 baa A ESLOSA NO SAGE LA DI GION Y KO AUARECE EN EL DI
YELEEGNICO TIERE Uli AUTCHOVIL HAXCA PACKARD MODy

1956, 4. f:
; Santads Dever
D:PTO. No. 8.= JOSE Vy (AIALEY GERENTE DE VENTAS DE LA CIA. HODERRERS
“DO ESTUSA TO SABE LA DIRECCIUN Y TANTOCO APAKECE EN EL DI=
RECTORIO TELEFONECO TIEAE UN AUTCNOVIL LORD 200, ,

: DEPTO. Now Ge SRA, MARSHAM ES MASAJISTA A DOUMICILIO NO TIENE AUTOMOVIL.
a aa on of bre btestheng

* te Who Re 1968.



--- Page 161 ---
GOMEZ, HIGIIO (Spaniard)

4-2-0-26
8-2-3-5 ¢.3

GOMEZ, Higinto (Jr.)



--- Page 162 ---
CARDED

Pemseripts of “General” Norton SLO

~ Svat thet be bod found the bng coutaining the wacuscri

i the corthorsd cover ‘sheets of both mamocrirts tdentified

~,

. . ‘LDOTID OV RIAL © : , ;

‘The, Consul General

_ C/PR0 = T. Fronk Crigler

Just after $100 FM Last Friday, Sr. Mt nie’ Chree irs,
; qualy unkrovn to ‘fe Dut whose eniling card inficates _
¢ Proper Conpany here, ‘

bez contafning tvo book-length mamséripts. Se. Gomez -

the eletstar of the office Yullding 1a vbich he vorks, at
Roforns Bo. 308, opposite the Enbacsy- Fo said thst he was
ienerent as to the ddertity of their author, 65 well as who
it aight have béen who hal Zeft thea in the elevatar. He
head exsatred thea briefly, ne said, and then decided that <3 oc
. they oucht inmcdiotely to be brought to the Bnbassy-

ithe asthor as Horton Slone, end one of these shoved his

lgddrecs to ke "Ceneral” Horton Slone, c/o tr. Je Edgar Hooters.
Ctidef of the F.B.1., Pao Aves at 9th Streot, H.W., Washington,
D.C. Tha books were entitled "Sverds. along tho Shore,” ands: 7
“yonctan = Folklore of the Incos." .A cursory examination of
the former. revealed a clumsy hnto thens, charging minority +. ie"
greeps in the United ‘States with selling ait to the commnizts.
The. letter was. appareztly e romantic. treatment in govel. fore |!
of Pizarro's conquest of Porte :

: +e ooo at robe ate rn a) athe th
on the sane day Sar storage and subsequent dispositions / f (ped bo :

pee
Eee mlndder ee,


--- Page 163 ---
PAG.2C.

David N. Wiesley, consul
general honorario de fa em-
bajada de Islandia y suespo-
sa, Gene Galt dé Wiesley
ofrecteron una recepcién

* Funes witimo, en la residen-

cla del conswado. con moti-
Voda aniversario numere 24

-de la independencia de ese

”. pals...-Islandiase constituys

en republica el afio de 1944,
dejando de ser posesion de

-Dinamsrca-a A que habis

Pertenecido desde 1397.
Los. invitados esa noche

. fueron ef licenciado Eigit

Nyegasrd, embajadcrdeNo-
ruega y seflora; Hans von
Haffner, embajador de Di-
namarca y sefiora; Tord Go-
ransson, embajador de Sue-
cia, y sefiora, Joaquin Her-

Fiesta Nacional de lilandin

eee asa seon

a.

wen aanA ss

7

wih /.. 3

PORE De eee ee

nandez Armas, embajador #
de Cuba, y sefiora; Valentin #
S. Loguinov y séfiora; Bok »
Hyung Lee y sefiora, Marta 4
Fonseca GuardladeJimenez 4 ¢
‘Rafael Mirabal Fernandez Y ay
seftora, Thomas Te-Ken Kao

_¥ séfiora, -

1 Con el anfitrion, senor 3
David Wiesley. tercero ala
bequierda, Bok Hyung Lee, Sy

_Nahadevma.3:...KappyoLee ‘
y Zell Rafelson. 4 Notlang » *



--- Page 164 ---
es
‘

25 June 1968
saevects Nebraska 160

\ : Pléase rive this addréss to Mike and ask bia fo est us tte noms of the.
i . tenants in this building and wiere they’ works “it ‘8 ab Spartzect: ‘atlding. -

I
: |
" Orig to JKB on 26 June 68 [
Eine (2/177 2_ |
WSOB-9Y/4 |

i
!
!



--- Page 165 ---
14-0000

Wo

San RR A tN es _-

oe . .

en ee ne

2 epee sas

GoxTact REPORT = ===
‘gupsect: . -  nesaner = — 3777 7
DATE. OF MEETING: 3 June 1968:

: a. 1 net: Siegect ‘in his room at the Del "paseo from 1430 to vee
‘1615. The : :
3

a4 ‘conversition: on 20. May,

eting wi be arranged by telephone,
, hearing from LOGINOV after their telephone!
‘Subject ‘called him on 30 or 31 May.

Subject told LOGI NOV, he couldn't remember who was supposed to
.call whom about setting a date’ for the LOGINOVS! visit te .

Subject's home, and he just wanted ‘to check to see that they :
hadn't gotten their signal crossed. LOGINOV said that it wasn't.

that-he was waiting for Subject to call, but simply that a free
date hadn't opened up yet. - “LOGINOV said that it didn't look as

thought he. “was going to be able to get to ‘Subjects home for
the next couple of weeks; but. that’ he pas definitely wanted to
take Subject up on his’ invitation and would call him just as

soon ‘as he definitely knew he’ would have a free Saturday or Sunday -

when he could come .
7 = 3. I instructed Subject to “Teave the, initiative for the next
contact to LOGINOV. | .
, he | Pedro” DAIMA,'
; in Cuernavaca. The firn déals in. citric acid.

,Subject's knowledze, DALMA was ‘bern in Hungary and ‘came to

DALMA ‘ts ‘the general manager of "MEXAMA®
To the best of

|
‘
3

Mexico about 10 or 15 years ago. He is a member of the

: “Industrial Club" in Cuernavaca, and Subject occasionally neets

_@s P-1 712. a



--- Page 166 ---
14-0000 +

“the mistress of Julian RODRIGUEZ Adame, a former Mexi¢an -
Eee Adame

him there, Subject said that, DAINA. hag tried to be friendly

. with him for” several years and has many times inyited Subject and

his wife to his’ home, Subject gaid -he hag never liked DALMA,
“however, and his always found a wav out of the invitations, ;
‘One reason he didn't like DALMA Subject sald, was that he always
seemed to have gonething good to - -say about Communist. “Hungary. —_

Subject has. seen him sine then, 4 e has nade @ point. of telling .

‘Subject how good: conditions are. funcary and how happy everyone.
is there. Subject said ho ‘thought we “should therefore have the
fellow's name ‘in our files. oe . ; . :

5. BESABER'S. PERSONAL, LIFE. In late e March, Sub ject told me

about a woman he: had” niet on a business “trip to New York earlier

_ in the ‘month, Her name: is Velia SANCHEZ Belmont, Mexican citizen,

‘age approximately 33. Subject happened to sit next to her on the,
flight to New York, struck up a conversation, and ultimately:
“spent a few fights: with her in New York...

6. Subject told ‘me. that Velia was once married to an .
American singer, but had been. divorced and: “subsequent iy becorie. a
‘Secretary of Agriculture (under LOPEZ ‘Hateos) and currently the
President of the International Cotton Association. Subject said
that through RODRIGUEZ Adame, Velia had gotten to know many of -
the ‘top peoplé in the PRI ‘and had decone.. particularly. friendly with
the wife of Alfonso’ MARTINEZ Dominguez, the new head. of ‘the ,
PRI. Sudject said that Velia had. become fairly wealthy as the

result of her influential contacts and now owned an apartment

) months ago, DALMA tock a. trip te Hungary, and whenever -


--- Page 167 ---
‘

in New York City, a| house: in Mexice City, and a second house’

in Acapulco, where she also had a sizable piece of undeveloped.

land. Subject deceribed Veliaas. doth. extremely intelligent

. and a. ‘tremendous sexyal partner, and speculated that because of

her excellent political contacts, she might from. time to tine be

able te provide, some interesting information on the Mexican.

with ‘him and nie

invitation spent ; tt

on the beach at the Pierre Maiques Hotel. Subject introduced me

toy phony name) as a business contact from the States, and I had —
rva 8 throughout. the =

- the. opportunity. to mY
afternoon. As subject told . she te a ractive, well-built,

intelligent, polished very sharp, and. evidently very shrewd.-
She. also speaks very good Englishs She. told me she had Just

returned two days azo. from’ a shopping trip. to New York with the
‘wife of MARTINEZ Dominguez. She. said the -seflora is really just’
a country | woman and had asked her to ge with her to lew York ‘te

help her pick oye. a new wardrobe, which she needed for her new.
role as the wife of the leader of the PRIs We later drove to
Vliats house for a drink, ‘and from its size and location
(overlooking the bay between the zocalo and the Caleta Hotel, it.
. Would indeed appear she. flad-a ‘eonsideraltle amount of money. .
6 On 3 ‘June, § Subject told me. that his romance with Velia .

had zotten out of hand, as she was. extremely demanding and
possessive and wanted hin to divorce his wife and marry her.
The problem, Subject said, was that he felt. just. strongly enourh



--- Page 168 ---
}4-00000

“A

7 “what I know about her from subject and from personal contect, I
am afraid that it We did’ succeed in recruiting her for whatever

‘about her that he couldn't just dismiss. the ideas Moreover, his

wife had learned about  Vellay, an2 althe ah! she was acevetomed to

me to. sti 1 love. and who was tolerant to the , point. that :

. Subject: was able to have both her and all the. routine extra= -
. ; curricular activity he wanted at ‘the same time, I pointed out

- that this certainly wulda't be the. case with Vella, who would
‘probably poison him if he even looked at another: WOMAN» After: _

batting this around for sore time, Subject finally said he

‘agreed with me and that if he couldn't simply keep Velia on

the’ atring, heta have no choice but to. drop hai. : This is.

hardly to ot) “however, ‘that this ts what Subject wiht do; and.

I suspéct Vv vida’ “will continue ‘to Aisrupt, Subject!s: personal life

for s some tine ‘to Cotte. ;

female spies-~there ;

» two considerations which should be. mentioned. First,

¢ : (at least at this :

re Mantis


--- Page 169 ---
poe te Se dag, ne a ance oe nine Stee

Ay a oA

pe om renee eine? ete

purpose, we would ‘sooner or’ later find that we had a genuine i

_> Mexican tigra by the tail.



--- Page 170 ---
We
oe fo _ ™.

i : : -
i we - oe Th
i

“fe - fe wepies cl

re cee . ‘ . . ; :
CONTACT i REPORT | ., ‘

SUBJECT: © —-LIOVAL2 pe
DATE CF MESTING: 32 Fay r 1968 - hy
1. corcke and I net with subject ‘at the: airy Queen, on
5 hours. “subject will call if”
during, COIGNEYs hone. | le

eet hin at the Dairy Queen at the time “specified over

. ~ gaia Antonio. from. 1600 te

hing of. interest devel
i

the phone, - oe ee | ct

26 ' Subject ‘said he hed a good triend by the name of Donald

‘BRE GS who was planning to visit him in Mexico for about three
egaaning the first or second week ‘of- June. ® BRIGGS; ©

: according to Subject, ‘teaches Spanish at ‘Plorida State and

. . |
4 speak sone Russians - Subject said he. nent:doned BRIGGSS upcoming a

visit and the fact BRI! GS knows some Russian to VIDIELLA .
: et class on 29 Kays -VEDTEL d sur
that he, Subject) BRIGGS , and his »(vannst28 3 good friend

7 Valontin (LOGINGY) --as ‘a group of Hubstan spedkersesall get ,
tonether for an evening. VIDIELIA suggested that they £0 to.

“his Frendh girl friend's apartment and. have a blast Forlete ;
‘with girls and booze. VIDIELLA then asked if: ‘Sub ject thought. ’
ald. mind ifa Soviet + Frbessy official came alonge :

: a make definite plans ata later « date.
“3. Subject said that VIDIELLA mentioned that hio mother

i hae taucht Spanish ° Valentin in Houcow.

tk at (> uri) Parser noni
( a ; UUs ind

i
i


--- Page 171 ---
1400000 5 &

SE

- . oN

MEMORANDUS FOR: The Record

yA : ‘Chiez, SB . : .
Chief of Station . - ao
+ ara, 17 “and ;

SUBJECT. Consular Co>ps Visit: to Guadalaj

1S: May 1968S.

least one of!
Association (a Gus
the group. Travel

owever,
escnta tive « of the veragrez coxs’
mata an or Dominican) also traveled wi
and irom Guadalajara wes by train ng anple opportunity
for a variety of conversations, undersigned also found:
jimsell seated on sevéral occasions next vo che Soviets and
the Cubans, with om he also conversed while visiting poiats

of interest lisced in the official program of the visit.

-CICAR RD cervainly made aa effort to be as sociable as
: fnohis ‘dealings with vsigned. By the end.
of the v: sit, as ama zter ori ioe a in spite ef several
pointed discussions, ce. peared to. have become
‘ath his arn
=m by his first
more reasonable: than
that he could Have a
: showing
several —
at the éxpense
it to the Guadalajara
(to the cathecrai the
CICARD sa
isted out that”

; the ‘undersi
. a Comnuatse country, Cuca cert

Peat

ry



--- Page 172 ---
:
d
i
:

$
3
q
§
a

&

iin ea paar Ce a RewiENREN RCD CR oy URbaeTNaD es

2 Re Ua Shar ROE AEN ER OMAR ROBES ISTELIRY AUIS i OA

|

ta
accorded
up the ¢h
that’ ther

the -gover:

howévér,

to any type of religion.

gover.

aMment

ny “good Communists"

id

CICARD went on

SOz

c

vana'by lighting_

nbassador ‘to

© distinction’ |

in Cuva who were also——~
ri » anerg people fairly h:
He, “CICARD; was a dedicated revolutionary,.

not give any part of his loyalty tu the regime.
to, emphasize that coe

yup in

the ciose CASTRO relations with the Vatican were a demonstra-
tion of the deocratic nature of Fidel's regime.
sthe wu cersigned joked about Raci CASTRO'S recent

instances

et

Fidei has

‘sh which orought
1 enterprise and further ration
and soit, drinks.

aS coxzcerned,
_Nouid not mucch that of last year,
2. not go over 5,000,000 tons.
epeated time and again that they were convinced, as
that by 1970 Ciba would have.a
AS a natter of fact,
in the conversation about other matters,
se-were that from which Cuba would have no more
Someone in
; in the press of rapprochenent :
CICARD said he. did not
‘tweea. the two countries
undersigned jokingly. asxed
mi.the purpose of it,

10,¢50, 600,

cétera,

paozised. them,
harvest of sugar.

exs,.

about the

on
vas:

been made by the gover:
sinery as | possible to go on with its plan. of. industrial

: toned shortages of meat,
atted these were being
As far.as the sugar

When the undersigned
CICARD readily a¢
f¢hase badly needed equipment.
he also admitted that the one of this

but he would not agree

He and his colleague, ~

aad, the United, States,
he said,

one oces

at ar

relat:

fox

nationalization of

at

the group mentionec

, bet

meeting with

_

w
ta

On several”

every last
such things
told CICAX

¢ economically.

pare efforts:
tinent to buy as much

the

to CICARD

All
Fidel

CASTRO appeared in-the local néews-
the trip, CICARD rather -
e .



--- Page 173 ---
. ~ on
SECRE: : |
§ . -3- ' t .e
i Doty
FE Sout” the’
+ about it. Oa the.
a the topic of the’ ;
Lt gE 4
ao “and told hin he kmew nothing. |
a D protested that news of the arrests and
E- a reached the press. The undersigned told him

seen nothing of the sort. CICARD then went on - |
incident on the 3 ssy, which, he said,!
the arrests and . The undersigned {
:t that the Babassy had other things to do than to oy

{

self with, according to CICARD"s own description, ©

type students. This w in any ease, 2 Mexican

it Was not surpris:
ved, as the Mexicans ha

taiks of all natioi palit ces. bering “a Father hea ted:

Eos ée. the vrevious night in whien Yuriy S. CHERNYSH and

ESTXA were also present, CICARD boasted that Puerto

aid soon find its treedon, undersigned really

1 that the United States

nad nol a referendum in Puerto Rico, during which it had” .
@ statehooé ox independence, but the Pucrto Ricans

rec to maintain the status they now enjoy with

mited States. He also told CICARD that the two or three

that Rad biown up on the isiand in recent months and

2 no Goubt the work of the Cub ere probably one of the: ~

t ces of. sh .pidity that the regime had committed,

s 2 ent on te blast. CrCARD in front of his

' Communist friedds for thé poli sion pursued by .
Cuba in Lati:. America, even against the advice of the Soviets
anc other seign Communists. Ee said he could not imagine
how Cuba could continue with such progran after the rout

i 2 and Pex: Su and SVESTKA

3 to this, vemai
a Sereast 1

Se

i
‘
r

 vengevetae “and

tuat these so-called
fered in the last few
med to exercise over. these
e of thesé soverents had

ay during a visit

t about Colo
Tie undersigned told hi
onary movements had badly sx
““The control thé Cubans cla
was also Coubtful, 23 s

cized the Cubans. The :

ECRET


--- Page 174 ---
“sEecrET

| : . - : a= a -
i -_ : ; .
{
I
!
i

Ship in Guadalajara,
ty for the Cubans to
yudge of misery and

the Center for International Fricn

to
CICAND also bonsted oF the movi
help free Latin Americans from the

oovession. When the tindersigaed 3¢

r this”

I ioxdeo, CICARD Said that the Cobhns “had ‘to watch,

t yin that country and would do nothing there, The.

{ » by way of conclusion, warned him thav, any tfort

& Xico was doomed, as the Cubans. would get nowhere in’ that

f country even i2 they tried. At another point of .the:. visit

i both CICARD and SALAZAR denied vehemently” shat. Cuba’ had a
surrerted any opposition ovement in Mexico-or that it had

i guerrilla movements in Guerrero and elsewhere. Both

i . CLCARD and SALAZAR several times joked “in the presence of — i"

Po. _. their Soviet friends that any An can aggression against Cuba

be _ would probably sean Russian reprisals against the United States, .

but that Cuba in any case was veady for any alternative.

i \ While at the Hilton Hotel, where the group stayed in’ Guada-

i hajasva, the undersigned, who was looking out a window over= : -

é looking the garden in the back of the hotel where the pool is,

H otted CiCARD, SALAZAR, and (CHERNYSE late on the evening of “

i 18 May, just prior to leaving for the railroa 2d station, ,

? engaged in an animated ‘conversation. While CICARD looked

i . over his shoulder, SALAZAR scribbled something - on the paper

: _.' Which, ke handed CHERNYSH. The same day, about half an hour

4 befor re going tothe Stavion, {Reyialdo CEPZDA Hernandez and

3

H

}

:

|

?

i

i

his. wi arrived at the ‘HLLt nm, where they were eventually ae
ae tpoduced to the undersigned by CICARD as “our First Secretary."

fhe ukdersigned laver asked CICARD.what.CEPEDA was doing there
since he was not part of the [group and since the Cubans, have

‘no consulate in Cucdalajara. | With a broad smile CICARD said .

he was on “vacation.” At one point of thé visit, the bus

used by the group left without the undersigned, the Cubans, 7°. 7
and the representative of Ecuador and his wife. It was agreed. a
“to proceed to the banquet whieh was to be held at Chapala,

Some S% kilometers away, by ae if. the taxi could not first

locate the bus in the city. he bes was not located, and the
little group proceeded to Chapala, where to the undersigned's
-amazenent CICARD paid for tke} entire taxi trip and refused
noney from the others. i

3. -Uine SALAZAR is’ inaclineeats one Of the most uncouth,
and all-around uneducated men the undersigned has
> met. <A light mulatto, SALAZAR Speaks with such a heavy .



--- Page 175 ---
teens ee ae

about

o-type accent that it
AS a matter of fact,
igned that &
getter thasa they aid.
4 mo Coniiun vow im a .
ie; whether it was: relevant: to Tae ca: ersatioa
he ‘tried to embarrass the wi

almost imsossibdle to understand
INGY aad CHERNYSE told

tand SALAZAR
moat le could

ret on fo

re

hether ‘eve “Koraan woman h p
she did. Fortunately, the wite of the Koreas * paoresontative
speaks very little Spanish and harely any ish, and the
unders igned just would not translate. He also, in her presence,
lnunched into a tirade avout South Korea, w a the undersigned
eut off by telling lvim. that he did not know what he was talking
and that North Korea was the bott of the varrel as ~
Tay nations were concerned. SALAZAR said. that in Veracruz
the Americans avoided him, but that this was l right with
i Since-he had no business with them. Ke beasted that he
was at the battle of the Bay of: Pigs, which, he said, was one
of the most tremendous battles of modern. times. Since the .
Russians were listening to this the undersigned turned towards
them and asked how many men had, died in Stali grad. LOGINOV
saic about, a million.and a. halg. The undersigned then turned
to SALAZAR to say that if a thousand men nad Seen kurt at the
Bay of pigs he would be very surprised. Both SALAZAR and
CICARD on. several occasions blasted Cuban exiles in the United
States, saying that they were non without honar and social
respousibility who were afraid to work, The undersigned
maintained that oa -the contrary the. exiles, . who arrived without -
a dime, had given a very good acce ing of themselves in the
work departmeit, as most of. then had started new and successful
co .orcial enterprises in the United States. SALAZAR and
D said this might be so, but that in any case they ‘had
no courdre, as if they did not. agree ith the CASTRO regime
they should be in cuba fighting it. § LAZAR has the manners
of an arrogant dog whistles; at ithe table during Ginner, uses”
ovscene language ia fx of. indies, and, as pointed out above,
never fails co give out. with; styong. “patria o muerte” music.
Daring the banquet at Chapala on 1S May SALA: 3, who had come
with an expensive camera as. did ici CARD, took ictures of each
member cf the group so obvio
up to nin and asked him if h
well, to the great anusenent

ngersigned walked
is signature es
“a overheard



--- Page 176 ---
14-0000

\ye

)
J

; sEcR BS
‘hee : 4
‘=6-

%
4
?

i, incidentally, has pointed out in his reports
A aR is extremely active in Veracrus and that he has
var of somcone important in the city council as well as
vs. The general commanding the area, who iS 2. source of . .
. _ LYRSNO-1, has been looking for 2 chance to have SALAZAR _ .
‘‘depowtec. This Sectioa will seo what it can do to oblige him. oye

4, There was no doubt. fron LOS INOV's'statexents to. the —
undersigned that the Sovidt had madé at least some ental
notes before he went on tne trip about subjects he should
raise with the undersigned. Vietnam, of course, was profusely
discussed, but LOGINOY also wantod to know about the state of foe
the ciection campaigns in the United States and about the - fe
March of, the Poor on Washington. One afternoon that LOGINOV i
was with CIERNYSH, the undersigned told him that he could not
imagine how the Soviets could. favor the candidacy of Bobby
‘KENNEDY, an aristocrat and millionnaive who had never worked
.with his hands and was liberally spe ding the fanily fortune ——

1
!
'

a to inf ucnce people's minds, when -for example,

_ wag far more to the left in the Amesican political spectrum 7
a and obviously had the support of the labor unions, No matter :
# what. the undersigned said, the Soviets found something good gs
& to say about K EDY, who appears to be the candidate the 7

. : Soviet Union would most like to see as the noxt President. ao
“. Tae two Soviets laughingly remarked that the undersigned's
apparent disliked for KENNEDY might one day cost him his job. ~
The undersigned said that fortunately the American Government
was not at. the mercy of the prevailing winds as were the
.e governments of "other cou es. The manner in which. LOGINOV .
-Went about. collecting his "information" was interesting and
awusing. For example, on’ the way to Guadalajara, waen the.
undersigied and LOGINOV were alone in the corridor of. their
coach, LOGINOV mentioned” the armistice negotiatioas in Vietnam,
The undersigned, as he has doe many tines in the past,
emphasized that this oyportunity to find an adequate peace should
not be. thrown away, as a packdown in negotiations might increase
the tempo of the. war to the point where 2 much larger conflict.
. Gould yesult, LOGINOV agreed that no one, including his’
country, wanted such a co liet and indeed a maxinun effort.
“‘sheuld be made to’ find pedee in Viethan.' The undersigned
veiteratecd that much depended on the Soviets, as the latter
obvigusly had Ome influence over the Jorth Vietnamese Govern-
meat. He then said that peace we 2S possible providing that

as

A ES LO LORE Pt ee rel nena
rN a HRT I MEAN WRT SA ea

TREE Etta eet NO LE NEN

ET

wu
ts
oO
nw



--- Page 177 ---
ee a nae eee Tee athe Bee

ASIA ES REN TROON EN ERAN A DC NATL AS s he 25

‘Saaaenecmaue et oe amar eemmt ce wh

-

> five:

- undersigned referred him to a recent article in the

two tions were wet. At that point somcone camo. by
and inte @ the conversation for a good two or three
minutes. Rather than renew tho argumcat he could see LOGINOV
wantee te develop, the undevsigued started to talk about the
. Fields, Mexican agviculture, et cetera, - LOGINOV: : .
nis for ong or two minutes and thea reminded: | com
the cadexsigued he had said something about conditions for
he armistice. The undersigned said’ tnat the primary condition. —
for piacé was for North. Vietnam to pull out all. of its troops
from South Vietnan. Before ho could mention the second
one again interrupted the convorsation, handed”
the undersigned .and LOGINOV drink ‘s and remained for a good
mites. After his départure, the undersigned again
talked about something else, but. again LOGINUV, after one or
two minutes, doggedly went back to the original discussion

and. wantee to know what the second condition was. The under=-
signed then told him that this condition was that really free : : :
Glections be held in South Vietnam, About half an hour: later, ", . an,
“LOGINCV opened up on the March of the Poor, whereupon the : :

. News
and World Report listing the salaries of various workers. in
Ene Unites States. Electricians, for example, ate listed as
making $7,350 an hour, In short, the undersigned pointed out,
to bo reaily poor in the United States takes a lot of doing, .
or ¥athes, s iack of doing.’ -He said he wished the United

thes, os
States ceuld do as the Soviets do and send people without a
Gosive ta work om tho will to assume responsibility to re-

ation camps in Siberia and elsewhere. LOGINOV confirmed,

in fast, that that was what the soviet government was doing. co
GINSY also touched upon the seatch for the assassin of

Luther KING, whereupon the undersigned told hia that

h ited States lacked the reginontation of the Soviet Union

and the heavy state controls over the population so that ft:

was difficul: at times to find a man in that nation of more

than 200,609,600 people. in ong or two days.’ He also told
“LOGINOV thet’ it remained to be seen who put the assassin up
to-his act. Thé undersigned, .of course, mentioned that the
assassination was an abominable deed, as KING was probably -

the nost rensouable of the black leaders. He said that had

the white ertremists, as LOGINOV called them, dbcen behind the’
assassination, it is probable ‘that Stokeley CARMICUAEL or

‘ would have been shot. Duriag the ride on the bus: :
and out cf the clear blue, LOCINOV asked the undersigned



--- Page 178 ---
i Lind

oe)

pS etettesaratannman Repent rset caumuny remaster atancdrneemcnvoaa reg ua

- armttanl Aerertten oe nanan a oe

\ prasingliy enough, neither

ho had met J. Ségar nOGVER, Tho undersigned said he
kad not. LOGINOV then said that he-was a bachel The
undersigned Said that if he was it was’ probably “because” in
héad of the FI he had-had an awfully lot to
o@ then pointed out that the FRI was a

had the support of the people. LOGINOV thon switched to the -
CIA, but the undersigaed told ‘him that. unlike the FBI, on .

. which quite a bit was known to the Amevicah people, very little

Ziitered out about the CIA. LOGINOV made Gno more crack about

“the periodic changes at the helm of the CIA and dropped the

subject. A somewhat similar conversation occurred. a little
latey between the undersigned, LOGINOV, and CHERNYSH when
unexpectedly LOGINOV mentioned sonething about the KGB and
its dedication to the protection of the Soviet people and the

_ Gon tivution., The undersigned: asked LOGINOV for a sample of |

amp comnemoratini the 50th anniversary of the KGB.

ther CHERNYSH nox LOGINGY secmed to know that such a stamp.
ted but launched into praise of the service which assured
the pfotection of the Soviet people with such a light hand.
fre undersigned returned that the KGB was an organization
with a terrible reputation overseas, where, contrary to what
the Soviets had just told hin, they appeared to maintain
numerous stations.” LOGINOGV then pointed out that the United
States police did not have a light hand and, as he put it,

..evacked heads any: time they had a chance. ‘The undersigned
said that, on the contrary, when a firm hand had to be used,

the police iad a very bad time of it during everyday life, as
reecnt decisions of the Supreme Court made law enforcenent a
very difficult business because of the ‘emphasis given by: the
Court to the respect and protection of Miman rights. Sur-
the Soviets, nor the Czechs, nor
the Cubans had much to say about recent race riots in: the‘

: ates other than to con 1 for themselves that quite ~
damare had beén done. The undersigned had the ; *
nity to talk to LOGINGY alone about the xecent; speech
i CASTRO and tr: foliowing nationalization of usinesses
ctions imposed on 2 B people. LOGINOV, “who,

» made no bones Aboi that his country.
opposed to CASTRO's nsion of terroni t

s in Latia Americs, cs: e@ complete nation-
1 of private business was an‘action with which
"dic not agree." ile said Cuban Communist state -

oughly respegted organization in the United. States which... -



--- Page 179 ---
SECHET

“9+

oceasion claimed to know more than
ng Comnunism for S90 years: and

rhe undersigned j d about the Lact that the Soviet
: would have to give the Cubans petroleum free if the
‘erop this. year was as bad as- it appeared to be. LOGINOV
good. chuckle over this but did Rot. comnent.

® young one and on
who have been purt

Ss
ee

Jiri sv <A apes the ‘Soviets, copiés their Tine, and mimics
their comportnment, had confirmation of all this during the
trip. SVUSTKA was one of the first to-raise the topic of
Vietnan and pour oil over the fire. During dinner in the

“@ining car on the way to Guadalajara, where he sat with. the.

undersigned and the two Soviets, the topic of the Red army

cane up. The undersigned, who had previously told the Russians

that he served for a brief time with that army, said that he

had great admiration for the military feats of the Russians.

This, lod.SVESTKA to: say that the Red army was, never beaten.

the ‘undersigned then gave SVESTKA a short refresher course

in w

Prassian army led by Gen, Maxime WEYGAND end Gen, Jozef
ILSUDSKI beat an invading Soviet army, which had, among

_#p
-other things, Joseph STALIN. as. its commissar. SVESTKA. tried

-it t6 say. th
_of CHERNYSH to say something about how indebted Czechoslovakia

to dispute the fact that this took place, whereupon the under-
signed offered to. buy him a history book. That seemed to

pre’ ent SVESTXA. from making any other expeditions into history
during the remaincer of the trip. Most of the discussions

the Czech, Soviets, and Cubans
is, in spite of their -pointedness
ht of 18 May, during the train tr ack.,to Mexico City,

a particularly heated discussion took place :in a compartment
re CHERNYSH;. SVESTXA, and CICAKD were présent. This.
discussion:will be reviewed in the next paragraph. Suffice -
at at one point: SVESTKA intervened in the defense

times. During the

was to the Soviets, The undersigned then’ told him that if it.

-had not been the decision of President Franklin. D. ROOSEVELT,

- at the urging, apparently, of STALEN,
‘the United: States army into Czcchosto

(Stop the advance of
a to jallow the
‘Russians to liberate Prague, the armistice would not, have,
found Soviet troops occupying Czechoslovakia, and’ "things

‘night have been completely different for the €zech nation."

When. SVESTKA clicsed to b0- bewildered by. this statenent, vhe

the undersigned; who has already. Had. the feeling that -

= had happened in Warsav in 1920 or 1921, when a Franco-

e on extremely: friendly —



--- Page 180 ---
14gp000

ie re ecient:
a

undersigned even more plandly asked him if ne neant to say
ovakie.would have become a Communist power had
mies not occupied the country by the end of the
War. SVESTNA said that there was. RO coubt about this, that
the coming of the Comminist regime in Czechoslovakia had. :
beén inevitable because of the historical and social backgroxad’
of whe Czechs. The undérsigned expressed horror at a statexent
Like this, which did not take. into consideration the fact - :
that. such anti-Communists as Jan MASARYK and Eduard BENES

were the fathers of the Czech state. SVESTKA then went oa to
saysthat indeed neither MASARYK nor BENES had been Communist,
but that neither had-any deep knowledge of the inborn desires’
cf the Czech people. The uncersigned told ‘him that this

was enough to make both MASARYK and BENES turn over in their
gvaves., He pointed out that there had been a violent exchange,
according to the Mexican press, between the Czech and Soviet .
papers over MASARYK, with the Russians saying that MASARYK

had participated in an attempt to-kill Nikolai LENIN. .CHERNYSE
sai@ that this was-a pack of lies, that he had reviewed the
Soviet press for that period and found nothiny about MASARYK.
This was quickly endorsed by. SVESTKA, When the ‘undersigned
once more stated his belief that people who had known better
would take the first opportunity to overthrow Communism, both
CHERNYSH and SVESTKA started speaking at the same tine. The
undersigned pointed out that the Russian people had never
known anything other than a curb on personal freedom and very.
trang central governnent, but the. Czechs, the Poles, the ~
Eangarians, and others had known differently. Such people .
were thirsty for personal freedcus and direct control over
ineiy destiny. When CHERNYSH “said he doubted this, the under-
signed reriinded him that it was Russian tanks that had crushed
the students and workers’ revolt in Hungary in 1956. He also_
pointed to the recent guiet but radical revolution which had
taken place in Czechoslovakia, saying that, for example, che
day after the right to strike’ hed been re-established practi-,
cally all wWorkers-struck to protest 20 years of mismanagement,
poor housing, ard lack of freedom. Froa that point: on SVESTRA
remained siz hat apparently hiving been shaken up. The .
undersigned allowed himself t& think that in sevexal years.

at least the C#echs; like the}Rumanians before then, would be |
governing themselves without having first to check with Moscow,
This discussion ended about 1:30 in the morning... At 9:00 the .
undersigned saw LOGINOV, with! whom he had a chat about various

“n

mM
nT « Sennen

. v

ht

4



--- Page 181 ---
Anquired about SVESTKA. LOGINOV said he Had. --

‘, but comsented

ESTKA looked mighty unhappy about something. It was

s to the undersigned that, as mentioned above, the

ous ri 'S @iscusSion hac resily shaken un.the Czech,.
wao. was worrying about how things would ‘turn out in Czecho=
siovakia and about his future. SVESTKA, aS.a matter of fact,
mentioned to the undetsigied when he saw him a few minutes
later that he had felt-that part of the previous night's

oo ciscussion had been conducted in what he phrased as a rather

, cool atmosphere. This feelinz Was’ obviously not shared by
CEEANYSH,' despite the heat of, the discussion, who warmly

ted the undersigned the next norning, and unless the
Madersigned is very much mis én, appeared to have a sort of
liking fox hin.

Cae eek?

ersigned 73 ERNYSH a fairly easy man to

ot that CHERYY dedicated Communist, but
probably because he

S on typical Cormunist

oz 18 May mér ned

ads this a good oppe:
Views. EcYore the discuss z
above during which CHERNYSH 4 e of the main participants,
is fainian and the undersijmed d previously discussec
hings as Western-style elections and the right to strike.
On both topics CHERNYSH obviously was not on the same wave
th as the undersigned, Hf appeared to believe his state-
ts to the effect that a stbiké was unnecessary in a society
decicuted to the well-being of the workers. It would only
eripple an economy strugglingjhard to meét local demands. On
the subject of elections CHERAYSH was even further away from
the Western view. He pointed! out that some Americans, and.
cy perhaps the undersignéd, did not agave any particular liking
coe for ary of the candidates forlpresidential eléctions. This
made the element of choice a very marginal benefit, if benefit
a. was. The picking of a president and a political leader
inside the government where these men could be thoroughly
tested anc screened was 2 much better prospect. The under~
sgned' naturaliy explained ati length that, according to the
old cliche, "variety is the srice of 1 e," and that choice
is a porn right. The undersignéd said at he would never be
able to live in a place where:he could «2 piek his close
triendcs, his family companions, or tke people scheduled to
: esenv him in the republic, That seemed to make no dent

meee aetitprne

SECRET



--- Page 182 ---
14-0000 . . .

we

SECRET +,
Bars . _

in CHERNYSH" Ss argunests. _ The vundersigned scored a

. Lit ‘previously mentioned discussion during

‘the i of 18 Yay . Ee thea Pe a better chance to compare
. the rican Constivuticn with the Soviet one, underscoring
. _ the mguts.of centralisn and curts on personal choice.

aac) cussion of thé role ox tie Russians. in ;

permitted his- questioa of wh ether the Russians had fougt
-theis ce or for their regime. The undersigned | tola
that his contact eith Soviet soldiers during the War
“t.no doubt in his ming that the latter had fought for ~
their co aATLy, and families’ first, and much later to back up
‘ theis regime, Both SVESTAA and CEERNYSH naturally argued with
this view, particularly VESTXA, Who at tir.:s can be more pro-
Soviet than tke Soviets. As pointed out above, CHERNYSH seens
to like the undersigned's -conpany, and the farewell between
te, im and the undersigned at the station: in Mexico. City appeared
to be partiéiilarly warn. Hts, .of course, is not viewed by
the Cubans or SVESTKA with a particularly good eye.

fo Raymond 2, FRADYER

Disti ibution:

' Orig - 7 (Consular Cores - Yexico ) City)
1 - P+19042 (CHERNYS#) * : :

©- P-11712 (LOGINOV) .

2 - BT711I (SVESTKA) . . - .

1 - P-10758 (SALAZAR) -. Sep che nee en ns hae nina

1 ~ P-1861 (CICARD). . :

1 - P-10757° (CEPEDA)

un
bs
a
to
wm
”



--- Page 183 ---
t ‘17: May 1968
en
MEMORANDUM FOR: The Record —
“VIA - g) cntet, SB eg
oo \ Chief of Station: ,
‘‘subyECT- Celebration of the Czech National Day,

‘9 May .

Jt
. i . 7 -
t
1. The celebration of the Czech national day on 9 May —.

was held at the residence of the Czech Ambassador, Karel HANUS,
in Polanco, where the undersigned estimated that the crowd -
numbered at least 150 people. The only other Americans
present were Mr. Wallace W. STUART, head of the Political
Section, and itr. David N. WIESLEY, Honorary Consul of Iceland.
‘The ‘undersigned was a little bit surprised to see Rodolphe
BABOUN, the new Haitian Acting Ambassador, in attendance with.
a colored Haitian. BABOUN, as a matter of fact, spoke briefly

re ¢

to the Cuban Ambassador, Joaquin HERNANDEZ Armas. |

_.. The undersigned had several little discussions with
Jiri. SVESTKA, Czech Consul and knowh intelligence officer.
..When he casually reminded SVESTKA that Czechoslovakia was an
industrial power before World War I and that Czech products
flooded Western Europe, SVESTKA, sharply commented that his
country was gtill an industrial power. When the undersigned
mentioned that. MASARYK was very popular in the United States,
“ SVESTKA counteted that that was no doubt because he had lived
as an exile -in the United States. . SVESTKA cut short a remark -
- by the undersigned about the effort currently being made to
throw light on MASARYK's death by saying, "There is no doubt:
- that he committed siiicide." SVESTKA showed himself on this
ocedsion a rival of LOGINOV as far as provocations are - ,
-- coacerfned.. After the undersigned answered comments on. the
_ . Negro problem and forthcoming urban terrorism and guerrilla

letter" to ‘the American Ambassador which appeared in various

JS in the United States, SVESTKA mentioned the “overt

.* local newspapers. He hinted that the incident “descr ibed" a, .

oe BECRET

Potty



--- Page 184 ---
in tho opon lotter was. not only a blunder on the. part of
Ambassador FREEMAN, but also indicative of the superiority
“complex of ‘the United States. At one point, when Valentin

_ LOGINOV -had joined in the discussion, the undersigned retorted
“that the min who had written th t uit

he article was a f
¥riter without a dimé who somehow had found the thous
pesos necessary to place his editorial. When the Czech and
the Russian. laughed, the undersigned continued that: if the.

- Soviet. Union wanted to give money to the Nexican ‘Communist
Party to.ongage in such shenanigans ‘to amuse the local nembers
of socialist countries, it was fine. with the Americans, as
this is just ‘about all it could hope to achieve. SVESTKA .
and LOGINOV naturally denied ‘that their countries Nad anything
to do with tho Mexican Communist Party, not to speak of the

overt lettor on the Ambassador. The undersigned, tongue in

_ cheek, thon pointed out that he was glad to tell them for
their information that a Communist Party did exist in Mexico,

the soviet, were eradualiy inching’. closer together, When
SVESTKA allowed himself .to -doubt it with a nasty little laugh
the undersigned ‘naturally could not resist telling him to. ,
have a look at what was going on in his country. The reaction
iceatle. He sort of
straightened out, jerked his head back, opened his mouth,
. Gvopped the ashes of his cigar on the floor, and obviously
- bit his tongue.as he said nothing. - From the Aabove-and from.
the fact that SVESTKA. plans to drive to the next Consular 7
Association meeting in Guadalajara with his Soviet colleagues,
the undersigned feels that SVESTKA is' not only a lackey of the
€x-NOVOTNY regime, but very probably in the employ of the
. Soviet KGB. He ‘seems to be inseparable from LOGINOV and has
lately, mouthed the same provocations in the sane techniques,
showing himself more and more aggressive, a thing which he
was not a year ago. :. a . ,

SECRET



--- Page 185 ---
SECRET

-3- ne

3. Among other nasty. little romarks ‘made by LOGINOV,.-
including references to the. open letter against the Ambassador, -
_ the war 1) ytnam; the Negro problem, the difficult finaneial
-position the dollar, et cetera, was a reference to this
LOGINOV. at one point asked thie undersigned where
. (not the. fixst tine he has asked this). The under= woe
‘signed ‘told him ‘t at he worked in the: Consular General's
Office. . at! “What about the fffth. floor?" a
_ The undersigned told fim that the fifth floor ‘comprised both *
the: Ambassador's Office and the. Political Section. LOGINOV ——.
z : went on to say something like, '"I know about the Ambassador,
@ but what about the other offices, those occupied. by WOFIRM?"
Bt le The undersigned let that one go by as LOGINOV had obviously
found it very funny. He proceeded to pay back the Soviets. a
litte later by counting: on his fingers the number of visas
issued at the Soviet Embassy each year, the number of cultural
oxchanges handled ‘by: the Enbassy. staff,--and: "all tho work :
done for trade promotion with Mexico:"'- The undersigned felt —-
tha ‘the Soviets probably issued some five visas.a month, if
thac many, had about ten cultural exchanges a year, and had
practicaily no trade with the Mexicans. What, then, he asked,
wore the 40 odd "diplomats" in the Soviet Embassy doing in
Mexico? LOGINOV laughed, but he laughed green and promptly
broke off. this conversation.

regi tt hae

oso ease ener,

4. The undersigned had no. opportunity to talk at any
length with Ambassador HANUS, who was very busy it the
reception. - The Ambassador, how ver, greeted him warmly and
gave him a prolonged bear hug as he left. The undersigned .
had no talk with the Cubans. except a few words which he
exchanged with n Sergio MARTINEZ, whom he had not net before. ;

Raymond A, FRADYER -

Distribution:
‘Orig - 7 .
‘1 - P-8691 (Hanus)
1 - P-5510 (Wiesley mo Soe,
1 = P-12397 (Baboun) . : an 2
1 - P-7111 (Svestka) . mo . ‘ :
_ G- P+11712 (Loginov) ,
RAF: lm : : .
. a ‘“ sp EBlcR ET.



--- Page 186 ---
CCNTACT REPORT ; : .

SUBJECT: Besasra 7 OO *
DATS OF MEETING: 16 May 1968 re eer

'
1. r met Subject in his room in the Del. Paseo Hotel from |

. 1415-1630. The. next meeting will be arranced by telephone. |
2 LoGINoy. Subject reported that LOGINOY called him at |

“his factory in Cuernavaca on Friday, 3 may. LOGINOV said he |
}

had some visitors who would like to buy a few things: to take” i

Sebo Cotas inden Wied et icezes an et tegigte NE

back with them to Russia and asked. 4f it would be convenient if
_ he drought them down to subjéct!s factory on Saturday afternoon,
4 May. Subject said fine ‘and invited LOGINOY and the visitors to
cone back to his house for a few drinks after they finished
shopping. ‘LOSINOV, gratefully accepted and said they iwould be }
there at 1330. (Per LIENVOY=-see attached transeri pt+-LOGTNOV oy
called BEWEEP on 5 “May to ask for Subject's telephone number.) i
3. LOGINOV ‘arrived ‘Un 19 DA, a dark blue chevy) at the

¥
»
2
&
s
a.
a
y
if
&
a

i. factory at 1345 with three other persons? cor
: ; (a) A dig, fat, plain. peasant+lookinz woman by thé He
i name of "IGOROVA,®* "IGANOVA,* or something sintlar. LOGINOV |

: E introduced her as a ‘sonmercial Fepreseatative, but did not i
: elaborate. . —— : sot

(b) A second Russian woman whose nase Subject couldatt
rénenber, She looked to be 33-35 years old and wore glasses.
LOGINOV did not mention her profession, and shé seemed simply

to be a friend of the first woman.

‘ ces P- 9097 P= WL



--- Page 187 ---
ee ee we rs |

{c) The son of one of the above two women. He appeared — 3
to be about 12 years old. - , 4 :
Le LUGINOV and his three companions shopped for about an
"hour while Sub ject worked in his office, and in the end bought
450~500 pesos worth of merchandise (at wholesale ‘Prices, of
course). - Subject. an d the four Russians then left together,
got into their respective cars, and drove ‘to. Subjects: home with
Sub ject. leading the aye ‘When they wore. driving into Subject's
driveway, Subject, ‘tn View of : his wife “and two children and the
four Russians, aceddentally ran over and broke the back of one
of the BESABERS! beloved dachshunds. Chaos reigned for the
next ten minutes as Subject went into the house, got his pistol, :
and returned and shot the dog while the children. screamed, Mrs.
BESABER tried to suppress her own tears and shoo away the children
at the same tine, and. the four Russians sat aghast in their car ,
and: watched. _ LOGINOY acted extreiely sorry and did his best to
console Mrs. BESABER and Subject. Mrs. BSSABER recovered quickly,
however, and sooa had all the adults seated in the living room. ©
| Subject: served the first round of drinks, and within a half hour
: everyone ‘was at least reasonably relaxed again, Coes
3e LOGINOV was ‘the only one who did not. take an “aleohoite
drink. He wore dark sunglasses all afternoon and explained that «
he had to stay away from liquor because he was taking antibiotics

. for an eve infection, Despite this ailment and inability to

_ take a drink, ‘LOGINOV was nevertheless more sociable and friendly.
than Subgect had over seen him. He also struck Subject as being j


--- Page 188 ---
7
A
)

sean sg nec onan fe mnie ata 4s

eee) weet nce ane tien get ere te

. 7” . . ~ —_ . a

more relaxed than in the past. He browtht the BESABERS two
tottles of vodka and two cans of caviar, asked why Subject
hadn't called or-visited him at the Embassy, addressed Subject. =

: only as "tu" (were he had formerly mixed "tus" and tusteds™ -

with Subject). enthusiastically toured the BESABERS* new house,
_ and patiently translated for the two Russian women, neither of -
‘Whoa spoke Spanish or Brigitshs ‘The conversation was goneraliy

dull, however, and: ‘nothing. even. mildly controversial was a

discussed. The Russians finally left about 1700.
6. In the course of the conversation, Mrs. BFSABER asked
LOGINOV when they were ever going to get together to play tennis.

(Mrs. BESABER had of course previously dnvited LOGINOV .to play ; 3

tennis with her sometime at the home of a retired American ~ =
gentleman in Cuernavaca (Lees, Col. Lawrence HIGGINS) ‘who was a
good friend and who had an exceptionally goed court.) LOGINOV.
roplied that he still wanted very huch to play, but that it ‘was ;
always a question of time for him. "why didn't LOGINOV come down E
to Cuernavaca next saturday morning . (11 Mey)?" Subject interjected.’
He (LoctKov) and Mrs. BESABER coud play tennis an the morning while. . :
' Subject: was working» and then they could all ‘spend the afternoon .
at home: ‘relaxing. LOGINOV replied that that sounded great, but
: asked what ‘he’ was going to do with his wife and child. rs.
“ BESABER | ‘angwared that of course they expected him to bring Mra.
LOGINOV: ‘and: the child with him. LOGINOY said that vould be
very atce and he'd like to ‘accept the Anvitation right at that
moment, | ‘but he vag afraid that +his schedule was auch that he

_ was going to have to hold off on a definite anawer until later | q

in the week. OK, aaid Subject, mw you ‘call ze, or chall Tt Vy



--- Page 189 ---
call you?" Well, replied LOGINOV, why didn't they leave it that
if he didnt hear from Subject, he would call Subject, and

‘vice versa. Subject agreed. .

7 Subject said he waited until Friday morning, 10 Y may,

to hear from LOGINOV, and when LOGINOV didn't call, he called
“LOGINOV (confirmed by LIENVOY). LOGINOV, according to Subject,
said he was afraid he was not going to te able to make it, after:
all, because the Mayor of Moscow was visiting Mexico. and. he vould)
be tied up with the Mayor on Saturday. Subject said he suggested |
that perhaps they could make it for the following Saturday, then |

. LOGINOV replied that he thought he might be able to make it then, .
_but, again, he couldn't say for sure just then, "But anyway,” . |
"“LOGINOV added, "welre going to be seeing each other more often
because we've (iee., the Soviet Embassy) taken a house on Calle
Unbolt (in Cuernavaca) for the summer, and I?ll be coming down

to Cuernavaca every weekend.” - Subject expresséd pleasure at

this and said that he'd expect to hear from LOGINOY sometime

- : soon then, ‘LOGINOV assured Subject he would.

8. BENEEP, BEYEEP called Subject in Cuernavaca about “th00

on 10 May. He said he wanted to tell subject that a Polish musical —

group was about to open at Bellas Artes and. would be Playing, sone.

of Subject's grandfather's music. (subject's paternal grandfather
“was a a pupil of Franz Liszt and, according to Subject, is cenerally

regarded in ‘Poland aa the second greatest Polish composer next -

to Chopin.) BEWERP asked if Subject wasgoirg to be in Mexico ;

City the following week and if hetd have time to accompany

BESXTEP to Dellas Artes for a perforaance. Subject said that

unfortunately, he wouldn't be able to Zo, but suggested that

wh meen cima emmtemrnepete re ences wee

—_—_

~~
maT ee

mea amare



--- Page 190 ---
| REWEEP bring the musicians te his home in Cuernavaca for an _— p-

| afternoon. BEVEEP said he wasn't sure if they could wrk it

into their schedule, but ne'd check anc iet Subject know if thoy

could come. | .(ieither Subject nor BEWEEP said anything about the.

"vacation trip" they discussed on 10 Aprile)

“sift

i
|
i
1

ees ener ere ene raven - : — + . : a


--- Page 191 ---
3 :
5. 2 Ls
- { . ”
H .
7 po. ‘ |
Pot. WIAN EMBASSY. 15-61-55 i
fl. U2. Coe j :
} Biiay 68 vot .
re “4 35-N22—T1151- : : 2
_ io - ¢85h - 1h06
7 | : ; .
F faq. Out at 1550.:LOGINOV talks to YAXOVETS and tells hin that 0G
i oes EOCTNOY 00S OO INES
i 1 wwfondd like to 50 to. Cuernavaca tonorzow to sce ¥ CREESA I 50
i “can YAM give hin the phono No. of SxR, because several comrades

"aro going on home leave and would like to buy fea things. OK,

* minute. LOG will have. to call, early. in. the morning to

= story and g° thore after, 2 Pile! His phone | No. is 2-09-15, nis. nan
0. OK. |

is. HISHEL ZNESTSELY and tho factory is on Cait e AME Rens Texc

" Thonks. | :

oT
4

—

“ft :
ee ee nce ie ees



--- Page 192 ---
fans

AEMORANDUM FOR THE FILE

LILY 1 1968
SOURCE: binyRic 3 MA
VISIT 0 THE SOVIET EMBASSY, MEXICO CITY OF UNIDENTIFIED

SUBJECT:
: : AMERICAN-LOOKING COUPLE.

eo: CSD eee ne ae ee cent eee

f : : —

: Li by ric

i 3 ae Mazo de 1968.

i i Fesy

may . 16:09 Sr y Srita entran sur (Norteanertcanoa).

: ca 16: *37 «= Los. mismoa salen Norte
! : a

i : Estuvieron con Log.
: po , et , ; -
t. : El hombre como de 25 afios aprox., gilero, con ro- “
4 Pa sport. . .
q ‘La mujer como de 23 afiog aprox. - on
' i 4
i L z i
Y 7 Lee po eet ane ene mn nee ttre ne em my ee te ~ . :

[hates xtlachee ce o. 7 “ye: 5 50-8-10/11 pS

Ct /- ee We



--- Page 193 ---
eae
anes

g

3.
my

é



--- Page 194 ---
” Pile:

3 May 1968

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD.
SUBJECT: (tou) LAMBERT, ‘British | Subject

1. At 0945 hours 2 April 1968, Subject called for Valentin
Sergeyevich LOGINOV and left a message that. he was the person ~

‘who was going to give LOGINOV English lessons, He also left

his telephone number: 11-02-88. (This is listed in the reverse
directory for Mayo Internacional SA de CV; it does not appear .

however in the current telephone directory. )

2, At 1208 hours on 2 April, Sra. Cora (Inu) tells LOGINOV

- that the teacher she -reconnends for him 18 21 years of age,

studying for his doctorate in literature in Mexico, and prior to

" returning to England is willing to give lessons; he is presently

giving classes for other PhD's,

3. At 1320 hours, LAMBERT tells LOGINOV that Sra, Cora
told him to get in touch with LOGINOV. régarding English lessons. _ .
LAMBERT would like to talk about it, LOGINOV agrees; but says — .
he is very busy right now and will call LAMBERT at the end! of the i

week to make arrangements,
4. Source; LIENVOY 2 Aprit 1968, all on 15-60~55, |

ed L. VERMILYE: :

P-11712

Viste Meme SHIA pr 2 Drag ef

SECRET


--- Page 195 ---
the rostaurant "Bocana".

“gave hig name an

| VIDIELLA suggested that Subject tak

SECRET

CONTACT REPORT
SUBJECT = : LIOVAL-1 . -,
30 April 1968.0 7

oe

DATE OF MEETING

1. Subject called me on 29 April and wo agreed to meet at
The meeting lasted from 14:30 to
15:40, I advanced Subject 500 MN for his Russian lessons,
Next meeting is at the Bocana at 13:45 on 17 May.

. 2. Subject reported that he had gone by the IICHR to:
inquire nbout Russian lessons but was totally unimpressed, He
d talked to the Director of Courses whose name
be didn't get. He will write up the details for the next meeting.

: 3. He then contacted VIDIELLA at the latter's Inatitute
‘and invited kim out to discuss Rugsian lessons, Since it wasn't
a personal matter VIDIELLA suggested that they bring along.a
couple of the students. Odile MORISSET, a French teacher also
cane along. They went to Sanborn‘s cocktail lounge, While
talking Sra. MORISSET (she ts divorced) invited Subject to her home
fora party and said he: could spend the night with her tr he —
came. She gave her address as, . Paris 7, Apt. 5. Subject described
her as ca, 40 years old. Later VIDIELLA told Subject that.

MORIESET will sleop with anybody and that he usually shacks up

. with her on Fridays.

"Gs Bubject told VIDIELLA that he had gone to the TICMR but

it looked poor, VIDIELLA agreed, saying the teachers are no

good, He did not say that he is or vas connected with the TICMR.
‘6 private lesgons from him.
need accreditation which he could
VIDIELLA said Subject could study
with him and then take exams at the Institute which would give
him a certificate for that level, He said the Director would
be glad-to do this, So they agreed.. VIDIELLA will give Subject .
private classes at Subject's afternoon school twice a week from
19:00 to 20:00 on Mondays and Wednesdays. Price wili be 50 MN
per lesson, Subject paid him 400 WN din advance, The first
lesson was on 29 April. Since’ May ta a holiday Sudject will
go to VIDIELLA's apt, He gave his address as Romero de Terreros
LLS3 apt, 1 (we had #922, apt. 1) and tolephono 43-50-16,
acer File; P-8903 :
SECRET P4808 200 AS
_ Polg2 feeb

Subject protested that he would
use for further formal study.



--- Page 196 ---
14-0000

NG

cc BeT

. . Ve
\ -Z2«
4

i
t
i
t
8. In the presence of. all VIDIELLA boasted about his great :
: Boviet Friend, Valentino, tho consul (this 1s obviously LOGINOY). d
i _ The two students and MORISSET all seemed to know LOGINOV personally.
\ One of the students asked VIDIELLA if hé had been invited to the
a Soviet 1 May celebration, He said that he hadn't,
nee . Bubje

: ; as h

He then asked
_ Bubject ansvered- as casually

VIDIELLA was ‘tisbing for " tafornation but. I an. not. 80 sure.

| "oe 6. I briefed Subject ‘an what. to look for in his lessons

with VIDIELLA, to take short notes, and to have a written report
for our néxt meeting,

ae , Francis J, COIGNE

SECRET



--- Page 197 ---
14-0000

ae _ . Loe . . .

SECRET

May 2, 1968:
No,__080.

i

i

i

SuBJECT; Soviet Cultivation of British Subjects a 7 |
i

|

ft
1. It has coze to our attention that the Soviets, specif-

ically KGB officers, have been looking around for English language.

inetructors. One KGB officer, Valentin Sergeyevich LOGINOV, is :

‘notorious for using this tactic to assess contacts who may be of i.

use to hia, ~ . :

. . 2. Among the persons in whon LOGINOY is reported to have ~
shown interest are two British subjects; :

_a@. A young student, (fnu) LAMAERT, who is studying for
a doctorate in literature in Mexico and who prior
to returning ‘to Britain -is giving English lessons, |

b. Walter James’ PLUS, Director: of the Anglo-~Harican |
Institute.. . :

. 3. It te ‘suggested that you might wieh to contact these .
’ dndividusls to determine if the Soviets are indeed cultivating
them. I would appreciate receiving the results of such interviews.

W,L. VERMILYE: wep

Distribution; : : . oe, ;
Orig = SMICA : - : }
l= 50-2-6 , : _

bem Po11712° .

at
N=



--- Page 198 ---
14-0000 . . . ae . .

\>

wo _ & ® 4 Cy

ce ~~ RGAE = 26 APRIL 1968

UNTDENTIPIED WOMAN WHO SEEN INSIDE sov. EMBASSY aT 1040 Rours.

ENTERED REEE PETON ROOM WITH LOGINOV, LEFT sov" EMBASSY, at 1052 HOURS, . we .

g mo ce, a “ prves pear”

4
g

wey

-



--- Page 199 ---
4-000

(XA



--- Page 200 ---
ON sre graced nein fe TE Ty

CEZ “4 oe . Eder

. mo. a
. a oreicceaten Meat UNE NER MRIE IANEEE AER SED MINA EM ag RiCbSS “SUR MCHC

AP Ly, Miswnls ‘4 Liklene
— (0 a aa

7 NCR. a ;

"A a) Sage “y oa APN Bah n N my .

ray sy ;


--- Page 201 ---
14-0000

20! — re oe : BS

~. Ef i Padre Kurgus a no

es comunis ta) se Lléva.

Aductos Cuil a Rusia

—_ (FELIZ VIAJE!

Por ANA Maria Lonngi,

Icbrata-el mitreoies ultimopor la no
fueron despedidos las numerasos pa
nese! domingo 25 cel actuaisaldrin
30 ada Unidn Sovietica en un al.

{372l

eTaie-qne comazeate, 7 Cias en Hitsca, 5 oa
icv, Jen KemayF ea ce auspk

curcislisimas relecionss Com.
Ep dela URSS”

ss tadas a ase Selores Jose
o Quintezo y Joseph A. Rubenak,
n del mencionada.coctel,

aw Nae

Sen et. 6

Sone pemeeiern ene

radar
CTT peer ern e yoenog ene

.asistié domo Invitada de hosor, ta adore
Ydizectora de Tuns.no

Mertota hurt otefi
diotLen adage tt

Gary sator
muchos wires as:

Lge ream nes ot 6&
ataerar pd



--- Page 202 ---
A ee ne aetna nner

co
wma A

4
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD \

‘1, On the occasion of the visit of the local Consular
Association to the "Home Fair" on 28 March: the undersigned con-
versed on and off with Jiri SVESTKA (P-7111), Second Secretary
of the Czechoslovak Embassy arid known member of the Czech Intele
ligence Service. Tho undersigned asked SVESTKA what was going
on in his country, The Czech launched into, an explanation which

‘sounded like a recitation, The easence of his comments was that

when leaders have lost touch with the people, they should be roe
Placed. The recont changes in Czechoslovakia would ensure more
democracy for the psople and would more closely represent their .
views and take caro of their needs, Fifteen years in power, he

“Baid, is a long time for a leader, The undorsigned Pointed out

that the recent changes in Czechoslovakia might net pleare

“averybody", SVESTKA agreed that this was bound to happen, but

that his country had the right to do what it wanted without
worrying too much-‘about the opinion of some of its neighbors,

The undersigned then went. ono step further and pointed out that
ULBRICH from East Germany for ofe seemed to be worried about
possible repercussion of the Czech reforms on his regime,

SVESTKA said he did ‘not care what ULBRICH said or did and repeated
that the Czechs are masters of their country, When the undersigned
pointed out that the new president was pot a member of the Com-
munist Party but had headed a Czach Division that fought with the
Russians SVESTKA agreed that this was a good choice that should |
Please a lot of people. Throughout his talk with the undersigned,
however, SVESTKA tried to play down the degree to which things aro
going..to change in his country as a result of recent reforms,

2, Just to test SVESTKA a little further, the undersigned
asked him what he thought of the U,S. elections, With a broad
grin SVESTKA stated that Senator KENNEDY would undoubtedly be
the next president. When the undersigned replied that he hoped
not, SVESTKA said, "If I were an American I would vote for hia,"
Valentin LOGINOV of the Soviet Embassy joined the conversation
at this point. The two went on to spy that KENNEDY was the only
candidate for peace and social justice, that be had their koral .
Support and sympathy (this given reports for an intel, report)
etc, SVESTKA added that the war in Vietnam was good for the U.S,
economy, The undersigned told him that the USSR manufactured
more rockets than bathtuos and more machine’ guns than cars,

Raynond 8, FRADYER

PL nla

qn


--- Page 203 ---
14-0000,

als)

Loos gfsyten pel BEY ~
ec rae TEndkey
| Tees See ss

12 March’ 1968

MEMORANDUM FOR THE-RECORD ‘6 fk oP a yu fi aD

*&
SUBJECT: Jorge ARIAS Buerba’ Buerba:
———— Eo

le Subject is a 26 year old Mexican citizen (although ke
".  leoks: to ‘be in his 30's). He isa Spanish teacher at the. Mexican-
North American Institute and since the fall of 1967 has held ‘a
second job as the director of the: Community. Services Program .

at the American School. “In April 1967 hi married an Anerdean :
citizen from the. Chicago area named ooned ae WEINTHALLER (phonetic).

They live at Juanacatlan 155: witch is just around the corner -
from the. Soviet Embasay. * -ifome ‘phone is 15-28-49.

“2. Subject was recommended asa Spanish tutor in August
1966 by Enrique GUTIERREZ Martinez (p912667), who was then
c/SB's Spanish maitors: “GUTIERREZ was subsequently recruited by :
C/SB as a utility: agentyubut has since been dropped because
he is related to other Station assets. On GUTIERREZ's recommenda~

tion, I began taking priate & spanish lessons fron ‘subject in

: August 1966. at found Subject an excellent teacher and continued
taking Lessons from him until December 1966. - Ia March 1967, ar
ny wife and T had Subject as a teacher in Spanish courses we

eae vule * .
took ‘at the Mexican-North American Institute. I have maintained
cre Oy Kens 4s

intermittent: social contact with Subject since March 1967, and
ay
my wife has become friendly with Subject's wife, having visited
wv teu

‘her at her apartment te ow or three times and having had her to

our home during the, day ran equal number of times, I-have also
Files: in “12671 ee RORES ADE

RM 4



--- Page 204 ---
14-0000

04

kept informed to some extent about SubJect through his younger,
brother, Javier ARIAS Buerba, from whom IT have been taking |
“Spanish lessons since July 1967.
- 3e Subject was a casual contact of Station ‘officer Olivia
; C. RAGNITY im 1965 and 1944. OHber than a file card noting

‘this Guntact, |) i. ue station traces on either Jorge or

“Javier ARIAS Buerga..
he Subject and I froa the beginning have had a. very friendly

* and informal relationship. He is an intelligent person with Boo

friendly, open personality and a@ good sense of. humor, Politically,
he is pro-American to the point that he magnifies our strengths -

and positive qualities and tends to miniinize or overlook negative

_ factors ‘in our society, Subject knows I am with the Political.” _ a rs

' Section of the Embassy and that I have been: in the Soviet Union. :
We have consequently gotten onto the topic of Russians and
Comuunism Several times, and he has. always: Come out a strong .
anti-Conmunist. He has one brother and two sisters living in
vhe United States. The brother is married to an American and

' lives in Virginia, ry where he is in the construction business.
One of the. sisters is also married to an American and lives in

. California 1c believe’ ‘San Francisco). The second sister is”
married to ry Polish immigrant and lives with him in Chicago.
The ai ster in c" “Mfornia ts a naturalized American citizen, The
brother atid the sister in Chicago are not.

5. On 24 April 1967, LIENVOY reported the following call
from GAZLYEY " ‘te LOGINOV: .
Gaz nz say him, he arrived yesterday."

orn ee te Aen nt



--- Page 205 ---
-D0000

ne rent te see

LOG: “Excellent, Then I'd like to see you to discuss
certain things.”

“GAZ: "Then I can come there tomorrow?"
_ 10a; "No, better Wednesday."
GAZ: "All right. He usually comes there at 6 o'clock.
Ha got married and came here with his wife. Now

Hl
: .they look for .an apartment. I'11 go there on the

| ~ 10th, because I want to attend courses in English.
1
|
t

4

" This week -I?11 be busy."
*L0Gs. "OK, until the next then.
6. From this conversation, it appeared t that GAZIYEV was
probably talking about Subject, since:
(a) GAZIYEV had been taking Spanish at the Mexican-North
American Institute and I knew from Subject that Subject had had

- GAZIYEV in one of his classes, that Subject occasionally chatted

with GAZIYEV after class, and that GAZLYEV had once given Subject
an invitation to a Consular night at the Soviet ‘Embassy (although
Subject told me he had not gone).
_ (>) Subject hed gotten married that months
“(e) Subject ‘had just returned ‘to Mexico. with his brida,
(da) | Subject and his wife weré looking for an apartment .
(e) Subdject normally arrived at the Institute at i800"
to teach evening Spanish classes.
7. Prior to this reported ‘telephone conversation, I had
eoristdered using Subject as. an access agent against GAZIYEV,
but “had decided not to approach Subject on the matter unless

"there was evidence that his relationship with GAZIYEV was

developing into something more than occasional chats between

classes. I did not see much potential in approaching Subject
before this with ¢nezae tho idea of having his deliberately
cultivate a friendship with GAZIYEV, as I felt Subject wan living



--- Page 206 ---
‘such a busy and hectic life that I would get very little out
of hin. Prior to his marriage, he was ‘keeping such a hectic
schedule between his Institute and private classes that he
wasn't sleeping or eating: properly and was having increasing
. problems with his health, If anything, his pace and health
problens increased after his marriage and his taking of the
_ Job with the: Anertcan School (although h he gave up most of his:
/ private. classes). .
8. Since the GAZIYEV-LOGINOV conversation’ made Subject*s
relations with the Soviets Jook much more: “Anteresting, I attempted
to ‘find out what I could about hen from Subject... For a number ©
of reasons, ‘however=-ineluding my going to the States in Jungew=e
we were not able to get together | unt 11 July. On that date
I took Subject to a belated "bachelor's lunch" at.a little
Spanish restaurant downtown. , .
9. The lunch was disappointing and, for me, misleading.
Iwas certain that if given the opportunity, Subject would
"_yoluntarily tell mo 4f his relationship with GAZIYEV had -
developed any further. When I casually brought the conversation
around to GAZIYEV, however, Subject ‘simply told me that GAZIYEV ....
was still studying at the Institute and that he still occasionally
chatted with him in the halls'or over a cup of coffee in one’
"of the. near-by coffee shops during the 20-minute break between
the two evening classes. . Subject commented that he enjoyed

talking with GAZITEY, as he was a simpatice, interesting guy,
ag well as an outstanding Spanish student. He also added that : .
they never talked politics. In roply to an offhand question |
about whether he had met any other Soviets through GAZIYEV, Subject



--- Page 207 ---
"I went away thinking that either GAZIYEV and LOGINCV had been

do?

1

/
said that he had not. My inclination was to believe Subject, and

talking about someone else over the phone or that they had .
never gone beyond the stage of simply talking about Subject.

: 10. Onl No “vember 1967, I ran into Subject and his brother
Javier in Sanborns-Insurgentes. They were about to have a _
quick iunch and insisted that I join them for a cup of coffee.
“As. Soon as We sat down, Subject told: me he had ‘a ‘problem and

would “Like my. advice. He said “GAZIYEV ‘had given hin an invitation :

to the 7 November celebration of the Revolution at the Soviet
Embassy, and although he would like to go for the experience, .
he was very concerned that his name would be put on "the black
List” at the U.S. Embassy if he went. He said that he had
tried to call me at the Embassy after he got the invitation to
ask my advice, but had been told I was out of town. (I was in
.El Paso from 25-29 Octover.) ‘fe stated that if he had not been
_able to reach me in the next day or two, he was going. to ‘simply
- valk into the Embassy and ask to see someone from the nsecurity
“department” about his predicanent. What. did I think he should

li, I told Subject to relax and forget about going to the -
U.S, Embassy, as the Embassy ould not give him any advice ~~~
other than to tell hin that: it, was entirely his own business
whether he went to the Soviet recept ion or not. Besides, I
asked, what made Subject think’ hia name would be put on a
"black, list™ if he wente Subject replied that he didn't know
how the U.S. Embassy did it) but "everyone know" the U.S.

Embassy obtained the nanes of everyone who went in "and out of



--- Page 208 ---
the Soviet Bnbassy. Moreover, he said, even if the U.S. Smbassy |

rafused to give him any advice, ‘at least it would make a record
cod a of his visit .and anyone who was ever interested would his
heart was in the right. place. Re siaply did not ‘want and couldn't
’ aftord to get into any trouble with the U.S. Bubassy, he said.
“after all, he had an American wife, he might want to go to the
“States, to. study sometine, and they night even want to go to
, the States to: live somedays Seeing that ‘Sub ject was indeed very
‘ ‘ serious ai became more serious myself and told him that just so ©
“he wouldn't worry, I'd ‘write a memo to the proper Enbassy
" gepartuent stating for the sake of the record that Subject had
. told me he planned to attend a Soviet. Enbassy reception, but
wished the U.S. Embassy to know he was doing it solely out of
curiosity and was in no way in sympathy with the Soviet Union.
- Subject seemed greatly relieved and thanked me “vary muchs
12. Seizing of the fact that GAZIYEV had given Subject. the
“invitation, rt asked if Subject saw much of him anymore. Subject
: ’ peplied that. yes, he still saw him occasionally, as GAZIYSV was
> now studying English at the Institute. Subject added, on his
own’ initiative, that he. had also been to GAZIYEV's. apartzent

twice and had met another Soviet there on one occasion. He said

w " (subject) got married (Subject Be was married about mid-April
— - 1967) and the second tine was shortly after his mrriage, as he

i
$
_that ‘the first time he went to GAZIEV's was shortly before he .
“and his wife had gone to dinner at the GAZIYEVS'. .Sudject finished |

‘eating about this time, and since he was in a hurry and had
his brother with hia, I didn't try to question him any further,
‘but decided to wait and have a second go at him alone another



--- Page 209 ---
\

i

|

:

time, |

_4 13. My wife and I entertained Subject and his wife at our |
?

: hone ° on 27 November, but the evening was not meant to and did

\ ; : . : not afford an opportunity ‘to discuss the Soviets any further.
H - oN | , Sub ject did tell me, however, that he had not gone to the. -
7 November Soviet re

ption afterall, because, despite by —

“assurances that there wag no reason for him not to go, he
felt it was simply safer to stay away fppm the Soviet Enba ssy
oe altogether. At my suggestion, we agreed to get. together for
lunch sometime in the near future. ,
- ike For various reasons, including the poor state of |

_Subject’s health when I called him one day in January, we did

_ hot get together for the lunch until'7 March. This time, I
played it straight with Subject, told him that I was interested
in anything he could tell me about GAZIYEV and the otherSoviet |
he had met, and questioned him closely regarding the details.

, Subject was completely cooperative, and I am satisfied he answered |

my questions to the dest: of his ability. It seeued to me, and

|
i
. still does, that there was ‘only- one Possible reason why Subject
had not told me on 11 July what he subsequently told me on
‘l November (i.e,, that he had been to GAZIYEV's home twice and
on one o¢casion had ‘met another Soviet there). This was that
| he felt somewhat guilty about going to GAZIYEV's and meeting —
; the other Soviet there, and as long as I didn't push him too
hard (which I didntt on 2 July), he felt nore comfortable
ignoring it. Tha reason he so readily mentioned the two visits

and the other Soviet on 1 November was, I think, that he was

genuinely concerned not to get duto any trouble” with the U.S.



--- Page 210 ---
14-0000

. seine

“Bahassy over attending the Soviet Embassy reception, wished to
impress me with his. “sincerity about whose side he was on, and
felt obliged to completely clear the record by mentioning the

| visits to GAZIYEV's home and meeting the other Soviet there. :
| 15. Subject stated that GAZIYEV had invited him to his

+ apartment for dinner about a, month before he (Subject) went ta--

Chicago. to get married. This means that the dinner took place :

~ about’ mid-March 1967, Subject sald he had expected to find

only GAZIYEV and his wife in the apartment, but that a third

‘person was there when Subject arrived. _ Subject said GAZIYEV
Antroduced the third person as Valentin “something.” hen I
; asked if the last" name were LOGINOV, Subject immediately Feacted
and said he was almost positive that was it. Subject's description
of the ‘Soviet also fit LOGINOV. GAZIYEV stated that LOGINOV was
with the Embassy (Subject. couldn't remember in what capacit ty) and
described JOGINOV as a good friend. Subject said. that the. evening
started off very casually, with LOGINOY expressing interest.

. in the Spanish courses at the Mexican-North American Institute.

_ LOGINOV, _ who Subject noted spoke almost as good Spanish as most

' of the Spanish teachers at the Institute » said he'd Like: to ‘got
a certificate in Spanish from the Institute and asked Sub ject it:

“he. could help him enroll, choose the best ‘course for him: to
start with, etc. Subject replied that he'd be happy to," lalthough

‘ it didn't seem to ‘him that LOGI NOV Needed’ much instruction in.
Spanish. LOGI NOV simply. laughed ‘this off, and it vas agreed
LOGI NOY would drop around to the Institute sometime seen,

LOGINOV, wno took the lead in the conversation most of, the

(evening, then began to ask Subject questions which left Subject



--- Page 211 ---
with "no doubt" that he (LOGINOV) was trying to feel Subject out
on his political views. Subject said that he couldn't remember
most of LOGINOV's questions, but he did recall that “LOGINOV
began the feeling-out procedure by asking Subject if he didn't
find that the Americans were ‘much poorer at learning Spanish
than other nationalities. He also made various derogatory
renarks about the extent of American influence in Mexico. Subject
: | said that after: about ten minutes, LOGINOY ‘s purpose became so_

' blatantly obvious, that he (Subject) stopped the conversation
‘and told LOGINOV that before they went any farthor, he thought

i ; .
’ | LOGINOV should. know that he was talking to someone who was

"100% capitalist," completely pro-American, and had absolutely
‘no sympathy with Communism, (While this sounds awfully blunt
and Subject was unquestionably trying to make himself look good
iin my eyes, the fact of the matter is that Subject does tend ‘to
| be 88% a bit blunt at times, and knowing: his ideological leanings,.
I would not. put it past him to have said exactly this.) Subject
" gaid that LOGINOV tried to backtrack a bit after this, but the
: “ conversation heated up again a few minutes later when Subject
 conmented that he had a pretty good idea of what the Soviets were
up'to in Mexico. When LOGINOV asked what Subject meant, Subject
-related the story he once told me about having been in Veracruz
a few years ago when @ Soviet ship. was actually or virtually put
“under arrest there. Subject told LOGINOV: that ‘feveryone knew
the ship was loaded with Commnist propaganda.
| 16, After about twenty minutes, according to Subject, politics

were dropped and the conversation turned to more innocuous topics.


--- Page 212 ---
/\ Sudject said that LOGINOV seemed somewhat irritated with him, but

\ on tha wiole kept his composure very well and treated Subject
politely for the two hours or less Subject remained. As Subject
| Was leaving, LOGINOV again said he'd come by the Institute to .
, See Subject dn the near future, but he never did. One day in
ated

67 Subject saw LOGINOV at the gag station on the corner.
- of ‘Tacubaya, and Juanacatlan, and LOGINOY greeted Subject by

nadie. However; they did not converse with each others
| 17.° Subj ect said that GAZIYEV left most of the politically.
. related part of the conversation to LOGINOV and never referred
i to the evening again. However, a few weeks after Sub ject ,
4 returned to Mexico with his bride, GAZIYEV had Subject and his
wife over to dinner {this would place the second dinner in
about mid-May), This time GAZIYEV and his wife were the only
pthers present, and the evening passed without any reference
to politics, Subject stated that he still occasionally. goes
across the street for a cup of coffee with GAZIYEV betweem
evening classes at the Institute, dut that, he has: not. been -
“to GAZIYEV's apartment’ again and has never had GAZIYEV to his
home. ,
18. Although Subject was very aware that LOGINOV's purpose.
in meeting him was to assess his exploitability, he did not seem —
to fully appreciate that GAZIYEV had both fingered him for.
LOGINOY and set up the situation for LOGINOV to meet him. I
spelled this out for Subject and also informed him that LOGINOV
was an exceptionally capable Soviet intelligence officer. I
also explained that it was very possible GAZIYEV was using the
Institute to spot other candidates for interviews with Soviet



--- Page 213 ---
.open for .the typé of t

- concerned how to handle Subject in the Light of the LOG.

and questioned Subject about GAZIYEV's

intelligence officers,
jiowever, Subject said

activities and contacts at the Institute.
‘ar as he could tell GAZITEV pretty much stuck to himself

that as f.
tute and did not have any particular: friends there

at the Insti
we about. Subject said he would keep his eyes

whom Subject knet
hing I was looking for, however, and. would

let ‘me ‘know if. he came onto anything interesting. Subject also

_ offered to splay up ‘to GAZIYEV and/or LOGINOV under my guidance

it I wished, ‘put I declined the offer wth appropriate expressions
of appreciation. c, ,
19. The ‘question that remains unanswered after all this is,-
of course » why LOGINOV and GAZIYEV. were talking about Sub ject
ove> the phone .on’ 2h April 1967. According to Subject, the
dinner which LOGINOV attended took place in March 1967, ‘while

LOG NOV did not attend GAZIYEV' 5 second dinner, which took

Since I am satisfied Subject told ne the

place about: mid-May.
s" which LOGINOV

truth, it would: appear that the "certain thing

told GAZIYEV on 2h April he wished to discuss with GAZIYEV.
INOV=

Whatever LOGINOV had in mind on

Subject encounter in March.
oh Aprii, it would appear that it was finally decided that
GAZIYEV and his wife should simply have Subject and his wife

over toa peaceful dinner in order to at least partially - erase

the memory of the first dinner.
ft



--- Page 214 ---
P24

Jono Amas Bucasa
COMMUNTTY SEAVICES PROGRAM

‘Tue Amenican Scoot Founoation A. Gs
PROGRAMA OF ERUCATION FARA ADULTOS.

; CALLE oR Tae neue. too
chee YACUBAYA 1%, DWP

~
eu
vat . .
.



--- Page 215 ---
2.

013. . ne
LOCuLwy, Mrs. Valentin . ; a . \

Novenber 7, 1967. 1100 hours.
Source: My wife.

- French Club. ty wife talxed to Loguinov at the French Club. There seaned
to be considereble doubt about thoir cormunication, ‘Loguinov might have said .
that she had Yust played tennis, or ws about to play tennis, or plays tennis
gecasionally. It seems likely that she did not play and was not about to play.
“he probably cane to the club for the stean bath. She was ina hurry, possibly
to leave the club, : 0 . : : .
“Charles - me,
3, | Mrs{ Smelt, (Wire of Anerican communist with jewelery shop on “iza), Sogn
\0] for the first tine at the Fronat Gla re woe practicing alone with a ball

boy. She had no partner.

se COMMENT

|

fo It is possible that Hrs. Loguinov and Mrs. Small are part. of a conaunications

oh .  Ghanriel. Loguinov's haste night have been due to the unexpectel appearance of

i meebo ny wife andthe risk that Szall night arrive while ny wife muta ws still ih the
foo. fo pa  Wiednity. _ . :
! eo :
|
|
i
i



--- Page 216 ---
a 10 Mey 1067. ee _ . eee

7 . — May 1967
— ‘LIREALM played i tennis at “Munidet’ ‘with LOGINOV>~ LoctNov'é son

|
|.
I.
i
i
i
i
|
|
}
T
i
\
i.

a

eee a Petal.

‘

Extracts from LIREALM-1t contact reports |

AG Cee 7967

LOGINOV played tennis at Mendet with S.S, Abdel Rahman Hassan

— ~~~Abdel-RAHMAN, Ist Secretary and Cosul ac UAR Embassy, This was

___the first time they} had 1 played i sogether,_ (played | doubles with LIREALM _
and his wife). ; ;

o

Dmitriy was there,. speaks absolutely no Spanish or-English, Also a

eee’: ane e = F — played with Jacques LEMAIRE. LOGINOV said his wife had had séveral :
heart attacks in Mexico and sannor play tennis,. LOGINOV said he wanted
a =——————"-Dnitr ly to-learn English, like his sister in Moscow, “EOGINOV'’ said he

knew Jean BINEAU, .when asked if he knew any French diplomats,
“LOGINOV claimed to’ have been in Soviet Navy, ‘then immediately entered” ~~
_the Foreign : Service Institute and straight into. foreign service after that, .

. 17 May 1967

: LOGINOV plays tennis left-handed, An instructor commented that he
—--was convinced LOG INOV had played much more than the one year-he ~~~
admits to, The instructor said he had never seen LOGINOV play with an

“instructor,———~ oes

99-May-1967
— LIREALM-saw LOGINOV at-Mundet-but did not play with-him,~-

25 Jun 1967 —-—— =F
: a _ 7 Loe wee
——---—- LOGINOV A-said she was chemist,- but did not-say- whether she had ever——
. worked in that profession, The LOGUINOVs never eat any food atthe club, -
+—but- LOGINOV drinks beer-there;—The week before-LOGINOV.-played—--—-
in mixed doubles match with 16-year old giz] and wom won a smail silver
—.-cUup, ‘-LOGINOV. hada’ Russian. movie camera with..him-end.took pictures—__
of people'at the Club, LOGINOV talked to a Mexican named Jose Manuel -
—— et -»- LNU, connected with some Mexican ministry that assists. SovEmb......-__-__
personnel; LOGINOVA said Jose Manuel was very sympatnetic to them;

— a e -- LOGINOV sald they had. meft at the Canadian o r French Embassy. - a
wee ee cee 10 Ju 1067 cence ene eee eee ete ee mate

.LOGINOVA seems intelligent, educated, quiet but friendly... Her Spanish
is not as bad as LOGINOV had indicated,

Prd


--- Page 217 ---
14-0000

wy)

SOVIETS

- Valentin's friends, Juné-30, 1967. |

Contact. My lawyer celebrated his 40th birthday on June 30.

" jim aml Connie Pollack offered their houe’at Calero 76 in San |

Angel for a party for my lawyer. Of the 12 to 14 people at the
party the following are part of a group who have organized a
Gréat Books typo club. At least once, and possibly twice or
three times they have invited Valentin Loguinov.

Doug, Wiltshire

Tinmie Navis
Alexander "Sandy" Reed
Werner Thurau

ue Wiltshire, about Masri. Doug clainod that Masri, his

partner is pro-U.S, and anti-Nasser, He believes that Masri!s

wife is the secretary to the aibassador. _ .

. Wen Aveda : .
Werner Thuran. The Anglo-Anerican directory lists Werner

as British. Ny lawyer states tyat he is actually Danish. Ho

previously lived in San Angeltto the Lonas address now show

in the diredtory. Ho since has moved back to Aida in San Angel

and lives one or two doors from Tinnie Davis. He is Listed
as vice-president of Jeffrey Manufacturing. He is reported to
have studied at Oxford. oo.
ty lauyer, who is ono of the nore brilliant huscrous~type
intellectuals in Mexico has described Werner as the nost

: prilliant person he has met in Mexico. Werner's friends are

agreed, behind his back, that Werner is "ill-caployed", that -
he is earning far less than he desérves. His standard of living -

" stiies his friends asaustero. © AW Cheep Cea nuare: /

: / S|
Sheila O'Sullivan Nebbo Thurau. Sheilatis the wife of Werner _
and was not at the party duc to-iliness. She is an actress, ate
tractive, extreme extrovert, and!the! sonetine zistress of Jin
Tierney (spelling 7) the forner head! of the Rockefeller Fourda-
tion in Mexico, now at the hove office in New York. Ihave «
often run across Shoila, but this wis the first tine I saw Werner.

Vorricr Thurau, about Valentin, AS Wernar was introduced to me
he acted vory surprisat. Ho oxplainod that he thoucht I was sone
one else, a fricnd of his, Valontin Loguinov. Ho clained that wo



--- Page 218 ---
14-0000

=

could be twin brothers, Hy xifo overheard this performance and

fait it wis highly overplayel. Hy opinion. was that this ws a

conversation starter, nothing nore. Werner expected ne to show

interest..in-his-having #6t a Russian. I did. Worner then told *

ng about the book group. Thad heard of it before through ny ae ;

lawyer and through Valentin, I had never before realized they
_ Were “oreard the sage gvoup.. Wernor spoke of only ons occasion
‘hen Valenti was there--he did not say there were not other -
ecaisions, Valentin spoke of several occasions. Werner des~ _
oped Valentin as goodsnatured, narrow intellectually and
OUS.

t
" [dd not acknowledge lmowing Valentin but avoided ‘the issue. | {
I do not know who knew Valentin and first invited him to the oo.
group. I do not know how often:the group nests or where. . a
\
|

Gxxzents.

T fowl Werner to be very interesting and charming. I have -
“held the sane opinion about his wife for sone time. I believe
I could developa him if at were of interest.

Werner deserves to be chacked, Everyone seens agread that
there is something amiss here

eon) EZ would not nind belonging to a book group—I have in the a no fog
past. This one should be real swinging and night have Val as. oo
a poraanont visitor. ; :



--- Page 219 ---
0000

Pays

ee ea ee cree terete,
- a ae

‘the tourist exchange between
the reciprocity issue to deny

: Would arrive in Hexico in Octo!
- job in the Embassy, not in the consulate.

‘BCHEVARRIA, the brother of the Secretary

to come to a cafe near Subject's office.

OD DRET |

1 . . :
. . \

1 October 1967

CONTACT REPORT ro,
SUBJECT fae AS leo
- DATE OF MEETING 1 10 October 1967

1, JF met with Subject at the restaurant of the
pel Paseo from 09:15 to 10:00. Next meeting to. be noe
arranged by phone. Subject will tuko a months vacation
with his family from 28 October to 25 November, He will
go to South Africa and other countries in Africa.

he weok of 2 September, PRIKHODKO camo to

2. During t
that he was back from home

Subject's office to announce

leave. Subject asked hin abou

tourist office. PRIKHODKO said that the Mexican Government had

turned it down. Specifically ‘SALVAT had told the Soviets that

the Soviet Union and HNexico was.

so insignificant that it did not justify a reciprocal exchange

of tourist offices (Comment: . Evidentally the Mexicans, used
the Soviet request.)

hat Oleg NECHIPORENKO (P-7442)

3. PRIKHODKO also said t
ber and that he would have a

“4. ‘While PRIKHODKO was in Subject's office, Senador
of Gobernacion cane

in and Subject introduced then. 7 oes .

5. Finally, PRIKHODKO mentioned that YATSKOV would *
be leaving soon PCS (Comment: As I mentioned earlier, Th
bet that, NECHIPORENKO replaces YATSKOV). :

6. Tne next day LOGIXNOV called Subject and asked. hin
“LOGINOV started.
off by calling Subject a gou-of-a-bitch, He said, "Look. -
at all the contacts you have in’ Mexico, even BCHEVARRIA'S —
brother", He then went on to berate Subject for refusing to
continue to work for the Soviets. He became quits foated at -
times. Subject repeated all the arguments he had used earlier
about willing to be friends but refusing to help thé Soviets
in a clandestine capacity. During the discussion LOGINOV
asked if Subject knew the "legal counsellor" of the US. Bmbassy.

pris: $- {/ 2(2—

t the status of the proposed Soviet -

{
3
i
4



--- Page 220 ---
14-0000

By this he meant ‘the Embassy's lavyer, not the legal attache.
Subject just laughed at him,

.. 7. On 7 October Miguel ALEWAN Jr. came to Subject and.
aaid that he and Jacobo ZABLUDOWSKY bad just seen Ambassador

- BAZAROV. Tey wanted ‘BAZAROY to make arrangenenta to get

gion coverage of the 50th —
BAZAROV. had told thea that things.

x 0 to Subject and be could vos

arrange: acconodat , BAZAROV would see that they got to the |
USSR. (Comment; ° ¥rom-LIENVOY we know that the two had an

- appoiatient with BAZAROV on 9 October and thay they bad been

agitating for permita for about a week, I feel that by
sending them to Subject, BAZAROV was giving them the brush
off, If the Soviets were really interested in seeing them

i
7
ae
if

SECRET a
i



--- Page 221 ---
7)
%
is)

CONTACT RE oo,
. 277 |

SURJECTs . BESABER ?- 3 7 77

DATE OF MEETING: 28 September 1967

Le a Subject in ‘nis room at the Del Paseo from 1415-1530.

. - a ‘Subject will call me a day ain advance to: set the date of the :

next meeting, which as uswal will be in the Del Paseo. }

oo — 2. Subject had net seen or talked ‘with CHMYKHOV or any - . i
: a - _ other Soviet since he and ‘CHMYKHOV were out together on the evening int
of 4, August. “At that time, CHMYKHOV suggested that he and Subject

; . have dinner together the next time Subject was in Mexico City.

| . . nS , Subject agreed and told CHMYKHOV he'd call him the next time

| ; i - he was in town, Due to Subject's tight schedules on his visits

te Mexico City, however, it wasn't until 28 September that he called

i . CHMYKKOV. When Subject called the Embassy, however, he was told

| - CHMYKHOV wasn't in. He therefore asked for LOGINOV, who proved

‘to be ins LOGINOV immediately recognized Subject's voice and
sounded very pleased to hear from him,. He stated that he had
hada wonderful holiday in the USSR (he returned on 27 August),

_ but was now swamped with wrk. He added that he had planned to:
call “Subject as soon as he got things under control. Subject
thereupon said that he was ‘actually calling for. CHMYKHOV, because
he, didn't. think LOGINOV had returned to Mexico yet. LOGINOV replied
“that CHMYKHOV wasn't in. just then, but they'd both very much like

to visit Subject in Cuernavaca. Subject said that he'd like. to

have them, but suggested they hold off fora week’ or so antil the :
weather got. better. LOGINOV aereed and said he'd talk to CHRYKHOV



--- Page 222 ---
_

wed ee ek ne

“f
4
— i
5 ‘
7 i
2 £
3 i
od
2
i=
sc
x.
s
a:
2 a
~~ <
Bs 4S :
om & °
°
~
ToT ts
omn::9
g 2
Q os
-
Ba
a et
g 8
Sy
a
~
.-]
g 3 ,
oa
° 3
..
£2 °?
5
ra
5c 8
me 6 ~
‘2
oa :
&
sod 6
-)
Oo os
od
ed
a8 er
oo ‘
abt

een nat ae nner


--- Page 223 ---
14-0000

ene mere SRNR NY EN ® SA TOE Regu RL Ameren My anne 2m tine egearantemeregent aetna

Te i ne ena aepan erin:

MENORANDUM. FOR THE RECORD

ago.
—

.. beautiful, Marina met and married a German Gentile -in New.
York for which her mother and family ostracized Her. Source
. does not know where Marina” is at present.

Source stated that if Erika is in touch with Soviets it would

~SCRET

ce -(7- Wile > 2.
13 September 1967 - . °

LEGiNne V~ .

SUBJECT : Erika Coyierman
SOURCE: :_-LICOZ¥=5

on on 7 September. 1967 I asked Source 2bout Subject.
He knows her well, : .

2,. The Cammerman's are Rumanian Jews who came to, Mexico
about 15 years ago, Eugene was a brilliant man who started
with nothing and ended up very wealthy, Several years ago
he attempted to negotiate trade between Mexico and Rumania .

but without results, He died of a heart attack about two years

3. Erika is a charming, intelligent, cultured west~European
type. She is not a leftist. She owns and runs INCONEX at
Isabella la Catolica 45 (telephone 18-65-61) and (12-88-32),

a wine and cheese importing company. On ca, 1 Septembér she
left Mexico to some “bad in Austria for a month. At Source's
suggestion she added 2 weeks in Israel to view the conquest.

i
I
{

4, They have a daughter, Marina, who is stunningly. ie Bakes

5. Although I aia not ‘mention ‘my: reason for interest,

only be to get thoir business, She would not find Soviets
either. *dootogseat ty. or porsonally attractive.

? ow Preys pemn

Francis J. COIGNE



--- Page 224 ---
CONTACT REPORT
SUBJECT. ©: -LICOZY-5°
DATE OF MEETING: 7 September 1967

Ll, I had breakfast with Subject at the Del Paseo fros

- 0900 to 1000, Next meeting will be arranged by phone.
Subject will go to Montreal for a conference on tourisa to
Israel. from 23 to 26 September. Looe

2. Subject. bad lunch with LOGINOY on 31 August.- LOGINGV
brought him caviar which Subject. had requested and paid for.
The following Subjects came up; , co .

- a. LOGINOY volunteered that NECHIPORENKO (P-7442)
will return to Mexico in the fall, Subject asked if NECHIPORENEKO
would return to Consular work, LOGINOV said that he would not
but would have other work in the Embassy, (Comment; I will
bet that he roplaces YATSKOY). .

; b. Tha larger part of the lunch was devoted to -
LOGINOV asking Subject about his trip to Israel and Subject's
gleeful lists of captured Soviet equipment. —

; c. LOGINOV said he has reports that Mexican right
wing youth groups are planning to sabotage the celebration
of the 50th Anniversary of the Revolution and asked Subject

- for information, Subject -aaid be hed no information on, or,

contacts with groups of that nature.

3. The following Mexicans bave booked travel to the USSR .
with Subject. They are all local Jews with relatives in the -
USSR; : .

8. Mr. & Mra. Samuel KASOVICH
®. Abraham YANOFSKY to Moscow and Tashkent
e. Pedro BRAILOVSEY to Moscow, Kiev and Leningrad,

4. Subject has booked passage to Cuba for a Russian .
enigre, Nikolay CHERNESHOV and hie family; wife born in Italy.
and children, Igor, Natalia and Sergio all born in Yenonuéla.
LOGINOV told Subject that they are repatriatea frod Venezuela
and that they will go from Cuba to the USSR.on a Soviet cargo

sbip.
fen dy 2
hE |


--- Page 225 ---
Ba05

S 0 seeRET

. . | -2- .
_ \ . .

” 4 -
8. Subject has checked with Adolfo de la Huerta of
Salvat'a office about the Soviet application for a tourist
office, De 1s Huerta had heard about it but said it was

‘Rot their affair and would be handled by Gobérnacion, _

6, David KLEINMAN, ca 83 yra. old, born in Rusaia recently

made reservations to go to. Noscow during the celebration of

., the 50th anniversary; He vill go in a private capacity a3 a

tourist. Subject described hia as an orthodox Communist and
was particularly galled that KLEINMAN, a Jew called Israel
an aggressor. . : . ,

Francis J. COIGNE

Ae eee eaperrestennpernasinen Tree ey ce


--- Page 226 ---
14-0000

cae

‘Tae Consular section consists o> three persons: -

Aten

4 ene Eergeyevich LOGINOY - consul (taird secsé 7 ET

With 2guch a seening-scareity of work for the Congulate,
it’ would ce sufficient to have only one man forit. Eut the
. Savies Emcassy has vo have three men handling consular duties.

She Consiilete is open to visitors psice a weex and only tno

:

tours a day. Zven that is.too xceh for an occasional person
. : . : 1

weo desires & visa for visiting tte Eowever, in addt-

i . tion to teeiz, regular cuties, wee cons wis have to arrange
| various masters relating to vis ing Soviet cargo vessels,
: stist ie and cultural groups, ete. Cn several occasions,

ey hac to co zz errands outsige of their overt field of

ectivity. Pertevs this is one of the reasons way, in many

i * ington wc6S, they cannot be reached on the velephone. Al

‘ro difficulty in

Given below

rey



--- Page 227 ---
to be sent for eny visiting cignitery o>

soparently, seruvinizes sid approves the names of doctors and

Genvists patron rized by the Bxbsssy “personnel. Recently a
Msn on Duty said over the phone that LOGINGV had forbicd an

to be given out the address of s Ga an entist, “waom the

UGGINOV is also in charge

n

for appointing a fan on Daty who would be responsibie for

% tgok placa at the Embassy on that particular

anyteing t
gay’ Ko one, except the exbassador r, seexs to bo exempt from
hat duty. tn a few ocessions LOGINCV encountered hostility
to his arbitrary manner of making up the cuty ros ter, Thus, :

a

woon a Man om Duty called Nikolay Serseyevicn Lserov. “Press

‘Attache end 4a (former?) Cuitursl Officer, and told nim that __

his name dom ss the posponsibdle Han on Duty for

that dey, I LEOXOV said treat he wos: ‘very busy

VV do it himself

LOGINOV Rad xade a nurber of secret enemies



--- Page 228 ---
3 ‘

<3- ; “4 -, H
: i

“ae contin tuous smile on his lios. Unguestionsdl ys his typo

4 : of charm apoes ls to oldérly ladies sné LOGTiOv is. quite avare

; .
r so thet he is attructive to the other sex. “kithout & doudt, ho

tries to capitalize om it ang wita his fluent spanish proo=

ably trices to ensnare Kexican females. Theres no indicc+ :

tion thet LOGINOV has tried anythir ng of theo sort with vhe

. al
Soviet wivas. Cne of the reasons may be vont he would not

like his wife, Aleksandra Dmitriyeva, & very fornidable woman

indeed, to got wind of it, On the other hand, the Mexican

women may seem to de more exotic ang attractive to LOGINOV

ieree unats sracti ve female.

Nevertheless, LOSTE OVA ‘seond to be cut te plessant, with

a nice cult wured voice,and gets along with her husband woll co

thanks to her good mumour and social activity. She hes .

been cuite ordminent .in Mestkom work anc ‘in the ch nildren's

sumer cap, 2g: Snortly after their arrival, LOGTNOV dousht

a tane-recorder for nis wife for 115 dollars. ‘hether it

i

7

|

i

}

i

i

!

H

| .
| se than his ow countryvomen, in especial his wife, who is a-
1

'

|

i

H

1

purposes, has not been

wag to oe used for music, ors thas

sesy gate at
cn t.oip her ana sad

SAO WSS GR Casy Ay sand thine.



--- Page 229 ---
sneering attitude is probably che >

a
oT ——

Another very prominent trai

Ais extremes ¢ nouvinisn, bordorin

to other nats
hizs thets as: "Nemchura", eto.

WINOV has any true friends. His

en for it. Althougs |

vers] errors in judgement in his work and ceélal

d should be Lept

he made

behaviour, LOGINOV by no means is a fool ‘ar

in mind for any possible develea™

Evfladislav Sergeyevich. xCAxUSES

is a young man about thivty-varae

stocky, with dione wavy esir over

rence of a vory

SN has tho aip

of an eany-got ng on en Wao can meke friends alm nos over=
a:

night. XORMUSEXIN

friends «ith anatelly
tac Commercial Orfice, an

each othar quite frequently

th geen te be



--- Page 230 ---
-D0000

coe oa eee mn atten Sinner Neat imc Hm tester rane,

“se.

whenevor any of the: Soviets or his fantiy

EXIN ig also quite active in consular affsirs and docs most

of the leg work for LOGINOV. He 4s also very active in

Festkom functions, whore he is in charge of the Children's

is emergetic and

section. KORSUSHEIN is quite an ©
pushy incividual and can de quite rude snd: ¥

tndoudtedly, he is looking forward to voing a full-fledged
consul in tine to COM. The imoresgion of

bition and pushy:trait in nis character is

sound of bi

iet should be cited here.

/A curious ¥
o i

in the future, XC

u

Howay slow: dow

will novertheloss

Somewnat, but bis innor drive anc energy

H H
maxe nim & more otroit and skillful individual, His further

ena eauticn.

g rapid and energotic out pleesant baritone voicos

- Shortiy after his

—



--- Page 231 ---
Dated CF SNUING: 27 day 4957

Ll. Zot Subsect from 1920-1045 en 27 July in his room 4% tae Dul Pasco
Mesol, Tho nxt mocting 1s sékesuled for 4 surest at D560 Gh tis Dod Pacede

_ Sobgest will eall on the 3d or “ch to sive mo hits room nuzber,
Ze Mente oe Qebtest ta Pevtats. Subject wl] hold a privete exibition |
of his factory's Latest lines of Surniture and arthfacts at the Hotel Prosidente |

feon Role Auzost, between 1000 dnd WOO. Sgrsorns' buyers will cet a oncak

" pyavicu on Tuesday, 1 August. Sevjest will conscquoatly bo 15 Moideo City

htations to

devon Sl July thou 4 Ave %. Ho cotd ho planned to sand out try

Gi2 the Dabassys, but hed not you dono so.

. Subject had neither sean nor heard from GOi Rvs

& Col, jarment2 HTICINS, Syofset#s wifto learned from Mrs, HIGGS |

waat the Colonci 4g duo back in iiuxtco on 12 om 14 Auguot.

CEMGHOY dsvopn.d in on Subject at Sudjoct’s hose 1a

Cuerrsvaca about 1800 on Wednesdcy, 2 duly, After homing ard hawt. around

for & few minutos, CHAIKHOV finsily satc that look, they were friends now ard

Slot had

he Wanted to 9k Subjust's advicc on a patter, The doctor whom 5.

nied Sov GOYHHOV!S son, C LOY said, had diagnosed the voy - :

stomach trovole ag an cdvui..-. case of one of the worst strains of 0.943

atahed advisod that tho child be kezt da bed ond ander observation, CiMKHOV

oaid! bho ehatd waa Consequently boing kept in bid at home tn Niciso City.”

Sno Coster, according to CHMIKICT, had also cxprossed concern tins th. amoesas”



--- Page 232 ---
Cae fe) 7 “

7, when he

to lead nus to ducida to t22 Go

Suogest by the tine Toouw hin
ea bin ot the Enbassy, to cons to the Del Pasco (Subjeet’s hotel) rathor
than tho Presiconta, whera elkeats ana acquaintances night frowa at sll his

Sovies frienéz. z told Sabjcot 40 handle “44 tho way he wartot, bub goat

rot to orinz me a restaurant bill for six bailesinras ard thair cscocsde I

told Subject that his near-ters “pbfective should de sixaly to establish 63 ~ coe

30 view to finding out what

sonsider

ete heceinenee seecemee cetnctate gemma, sta MAI eT

- CAMCXHOV his main target for tho present timo and urged hia to take advantage

of any opportunity to ust torether with hin alone. . a

: | mush rapport with COMROV.as possible, with
]
!
i
! (Ge Subgeot apologized for his £52 story about his encounte. walt

“ CEMLGIOT being a bit spotty, dus be satd ho had a hard timo wrcicrotarcing . . _

S2YEHOT ard wasn't able to follow overything ho said. Subject said .

GOMEHOU's Spanish ts hot good, ho Baca: very fast, and continually jurps

from one sebsect to another, On ths whole, Scrsect said, ho had the inpresoion . ol

ther nervous person end mich lose sure oF hinseis than, for

Subjedt said that whereas ho always folt he had to ba on

hig guavd-r CORO, he folt cunphosely rolexed with CHKHOY ara font

ho deztrated thoi relationship.
, PORTY SE Pe ee Ports. Subject gave ma an invitotion.
of

Int tation to

1

1

{

i

{
| | 8.
. | . ho hed received an tho rail, to a despedica for ANDREISV on the evening

H

|

i

i

{

3u July. (Zho invitation was formaliy dasued by KAZANTSEV. Seo attachzont

_ Be): Sudject oaid thet although he was coing to be da Mexico City on.the 31st, 2 8

Ya expected te be cumgletely ties wp with preparations for the opening oF his

exaioit ths next coy ard unless I had & spectai reason for wantin; biz to so

to the resestien, he was cokny to have +. skip it. X told hin that in . :

view of tho eimusstences these wag > nacd Lov his to Ede

ome ormaneaamenes Sauce

kind of peltson ho 13 and what he has on hia rirds I sata he shay : we
a” ” :



--- Page 233 ---
4-00000

ch

.Yoplicd that he was aint

IRIS: 23 and 19 cely y 1987 ee

pores

7 Toret Susgcct at the Del Pasen Zotel from 1350 %

Tne next meeting is

_) 1528 on 19 July

Subject 5 : a2 enll in to arrange

Ca 13 july Subjee t reported

sin wis ohways pusy. I gave Suvgect three additional numvers trom the Diario oficld

vache tried all of them in my presences He got thr ough on the lest one

AnG a WA

to rosea SONAR » and sooxe with hin f for about three minutes in 2ng

of the conversation tended to csnfirn BUSARER's claim that he is as * ary:

tone of

close end inforral terns with GOIARY Subject asked why GOHARY hadn't.

come +9 nis Home the previous SHO wedkiends. Y excused hinsel? ©

ginsly } beeen too susy, but wanted very much to see “Subject. Sut

at the Dol Pas 20 and way didn't GOHARY come: ”

un to his hotel room that evening. coueRy readily agreed to dome a: Sout 2039.

ct GOULRY had arrived a tthe hotel room

3. Sueject reported on 19 Jely ti

Se

rout 2050 on 13 Jaly and stayed for %

Wito com

ed “and. visited suzd geet 12.0

Stanzce on Su

Seon 2° 262700 an tne rothout: ig Sienees, who he eoie ins ail.

anhieited tie conver: int? 3 te

¢ Lnab piven DoCS) desertbtne |
i Souary C ive i- -3) Pb 5é

hen Cie SH) CH 9293C¢4, | +t
Ome Say Cre: a4). gow nad aan

COPIES MADE

ne, managed >



--- Page 234 ---
i. ee a
ive .
Anovican +
no fubice meeting was schedulee, Su: .
a % Subject would ret in oO
© diseuss further GOHARY's'e Axure or to” - _
at ane Fol bod Suesect 's American fr rien. : :
.(p. 3) Subject said it was his wife! understaniing from iss. . ; a" .
Ir: would return to Hexico Sometine Quring the week of
§- Suoject said that he thought a sizable anount ab of money-—such . : ° ,
“as $1,200 U.S. ser sonth, woul bea vital, although not the orimry, factor S :
ag GORARY ¢ to remain in olace. The prine incentive, in Subject's
. Hortunity to helo Zoyst . - ; a
OEIYKSOV called Subject at hohe sabout - ; : XN
“x20 on Sunday morning, 16 July. CEEMICCY said he was at the soviet dagha
navaca and, that he and LCGINOV had gone to Subjectts Sactosy avout 1700
: ahurcsy, the 15th, in order to present Susject with three |
‘uh the suard had told then Suoject had tert. (Subiget ssid h ,
. 1630.) CRNHHOY seid that was ‘
for the DSS2 on vacation, Dut he C7) was stilt around and
eruid Subject come ever to the dabha. And oh, yes, C2SRECT's child + °
st ith some form of Gysentery and could Subject. recommend a pediatrician? .
. . 2 nat desrite the nngivilized hour, he got cressed and went over
- ut 1200. GEONKIO7 luas overflowing with friexishiz, kext
: she from the smallest enild to the oldest woman to co up and say a ‘3
H i . -
i : hello to fs. Sopa3a .oand meekly 5 presented ‘Su Swsdect with one tattle of vodka. .
i 4 : , :
3
. . :
anna we
Ay



--- Page 235 ---
00000

Oh

1115 or .

the other two bottles.

@goka tn droves; Susject estimates 20 men and
. J

the newcomcrs to walk in vas ANORGSEY,

that Subgect and

greatly sux ovised to
OV

yee for sscut 40-minutes in all. ¢

talked incessantly--nost y stout nothing

da hard time understanding his faulty

On
3 5. In speaking of LOGINOV, GOMHOY did say that LOGzOY As responsible

"s for "ratters inside Mexico," while he (carseov) "supervised Latin amerigan count ries,
t cuiside Verieo." | CEUAHOV did not elaborate cn or give any hint as to what kind

s talking about, As Subject was leaving, GONIGOV urged

assy the next tine he was in Mexico City and they would .

V then said that as a matter of fact ‘he was coming

i
is
s
a
0
1
a
x
aa
“t
ye
ay
Ne
.
.

see and would like to see Subject thew.

(NOTE: Subject ts unusually tusy right now oe

to the U.S.--in about two weeks, but told me = 7.

I urged him to do

_— he would try to get together with GD XK HOV for a drin

tris.) In ali, Suolect said ne had the impression from CHEKEOV's genera

: é: ment th =i0% m to luux after Subject while he (LOGEsev)

Subject said that Cesar

the Policia Judicial in Cuernaviss

estes wea le ace cmnawas Sots ees 2 A rneneneenamaesscieneinstanaea states aneenenteatanart Mat RAEN

daly to ask about a room-Civider screen

erial that Suojeet's factory specializes

ing 1S “dia youtes “rot to pay too much for it," and
: f
: : Subjeet being Suofect and also hoping we might make it uo to hin, . ,
Lo he anaorar > MEER stayed on avbile and : :
8 .
Loe ‘



--- Page 236 ---
Es SNS

a

a CISB SIT, Ay. | ~

Sf teeta Sy

MSDaANDUM FOR THE RaCORD Fe 43
. 7
: : SUBJECT: Telecon with LIROSBIN-2 on 12 July 1967 r- Hl 66s~ hi
: 1. LIROBBIN-2 called the Station at 1355 on 12 July andleft a message i:
: : He
j for me to call her. I reached her: atout an hour later. She said she had ts
met LOGINOV at a party. at the Indian Embassy on the- evening of i duly. ce ‘

During a brief conversation with him, he told her he was going to the. Sovict |

é

Union on vacation on 16 July. He also” said, that PRIHHODKO was going.'to

the USSR on vacation on 26 July. A minute later, he said PRIRIODKO was °

i
‘

leaving on 29 July.’

iy tate remanent taller tenn anepanimsar

2. Subject said he had had no other contact with any, of the; Soviets:

since March, (It' will be recalled that she invited PRIKGIORXO ‘fo dinner” .

on 31 March, but he. did not come.) Subject said she. would call PRIKHODKO,
ina few days, mention hat ‘Loar OV had said he was going on sacation,: aod
invite thin: over before he-lefts She will let me know what happens, :

arenes ooh Basanti

a ee, : t ,
i sB/L .

. _ a . _ Hq

okey ees CPi

“P-2a70 ,° 7

mire cement maging



--- Page 237 ---
¢ Loin “ge “s
wher CF A 738)
Andoiry ab or Cr (aan

PNG abe aa a abet at at a dat SE RTAEN WAN ea Ie

NT ale Nae Aye tai eee



--- Page 238 ---
Fikes

Ae Ean

; —
Aree OLA,

Snap hherr.

?

aN
\
rN

Senta ee ae nc a serge at



--- Page 239 ---
eueltgdel



--- Page 240 ---


--- Page 241 ---
14-0000


--- Page 242 ---
2 oe

CP ALEA
IESE

2 d “Sy

_ 2/

Loeived ¥ PRINM Deg

Cohen ek 9 2 dba l
phy hee gm, &@ Geek Ep

1aoe el

_
i,

i

be

po fe
fo SS
| . DQ S Ss ‘G

Ny “ aa

P RRS?

i rs) a
PS Se

Wir.

1 st meee eet pe sate 7 .

‘ Alga sandra Dini niycvna
» LOGGING .


--- Page 243 ---
: xD

Uf 2/ a



--- Page 244 ---
114-0000

a4

ga a i . ; . - Aces: y Lnwnlsrel
gF/varch 17, 1968 Pd 7 , Bf, fe Ce

SUBS8CT: VALENTIN LOGUINOV

Music Halt de Moscow

_- valentin invited: our tennis group to be his
guests at the final performace of the Ballets Ruso
at the Arena Mexico. The total group was about

: ( - 4S persons... : : .. . oy
& fot oe ee

r Alexandra not. presen « val's wife, Alexandra, was

: : _ not among the group, Val made no comment about why ” :

p : she was not there. No one else asked, that I know of. 4 a
po ws)

E ‘Czechs. Tree Czechs were among the group. The Sve ae

introductions were badly handled and I wasunable to
learnthe identity of the Czechs. val and they spoke
fone ot Russian or Czech.

lauricee, (Spelling not certain for last name) «
Yer ue Tnvited by val. She is Canadian, abou not
oe ae but careless in her dress. She set me :
s being slightly masculine. She is_a teacher
py’ the mornings at the University of the Americas
he afternoons she teaches at _an Institute a
tors and Interpreters on Rio Tiber .

awere waiting for a mutual friend of Odile and val, pee
Ra fi . He never arrived, I asked Odile who Rafael was. y!

She explained that he was a teacher and her drinking met '

buddy. Every afterncon around 4 ~5 she and Rafael can : .

be found in the bar across the street from the institute. Lo

|

t

{

|

i : Odile had been drinking beer, probably quite a bit,
{ . 7 prior to joining us that evening. She has lived in

i + L 1 Mexico for 15 years. Her French, English and Spanish

| eek “ wh are fluent. Ste seemed to prefer French, though I felt
|

i

t

1

1

}

fet l - her English was better. . :
/: She dressed oddly with white bobby socks. She did not

ney wh fit in with the rest of the. group. And I'm sure she didn't
6 care. She seem8 to go to all Scviet embassy functions.

tS She might possibly be ‘an intimate friend of Val‘'s, sa
(- . if not a mistress, at least an occasional bed=partner.
. ae She commented (within the context of tennis, which was
en Ad the topic of conversation at the moment) that one night -
son . a : “"Val told her he had to go home early (11 Pm) because bay - ’
i : was going to play in a@ tennis ca ering ADE -
: atm) up

asy. A
. . ot
. eee ee

4 AKertand one
“ ated WEES



--- Page 245 ---
| a

245

at

: “RET
“Ui gareh iss
STAKE~OUT REPORT
DATE: 8 March 1968. - a

i. I checked the Hotel Prince: from 09:45 to 09:50 and
noticed nothiag unusual, I was outside the Hotel Alfer fron
02:50 to 10:30 = nothing unusual. I then checked the Prince
again at 10:40 for.5 ninutes and noticed nothing,

2. I checked the Hotel Prince at 16:50 and Sau tvo wouen
aud two men (Soviets) talking in the lobby, Then at the Hotel
Alfer from 16:55 to 17:40. Nothing except a man at 17:30 who

looked very European, This mau looked. into the -lebby of the ~ ---- ----

hotel, then into the adjacent garage, then back to the hotel
then out of the area, He definitely vas not a loeal Soviet,

S. At 17:40 I went back to the Hotel Prince to seo if the
entertainers wore thera, At 17:50 two men left who eould be
Soviets, I followed thes to ses iz they were speaking Russian, |
I turned the corner fron Luis Hoya onto Juarez going east, I.
almost bumped into LOGINCY who was coming west. on Juarez, I
recognized him imsediately-and I felt that he recogiized me.

I continued along Juarez fora bit and then cane back to see
where LOGINOV weat. I then stood on the other corner of Juarez
and Luis gcya ior 3 or 4 minutes, At this tire I noticed a
Soviet acrogs Juarez (at tho sest side of the Juarea gonument).
He lonked like KOLONYAKOY but vith too much hair, This Soviet
was taking panoramic shots across Juarez, _ As his camera

| [approached me, I stepped behind a Kiosk, However, in the minutes

before I noticed hin, he could bave been photographing as. A
moment later I noticed LOGINCY about 10 yards fron the Soviet.
Both saw that X had spotted them. The Soviet vith the camera
then drifted west, photographed the Juares sonumeat and voat
further west. LOGINOV then went off in the sane directioa, I
then vent to Feport the above to CLASTONBURY at the Hotel Alfer
after checking that I was not followed. J] got there at 18:02,

4. The Soviet had a sal) camera which appeared to be
8 sa, Thus 1 doubt 12% be got (entifiable Pictures of RO.

—

. {[— a

om eney



--- Page 246 ---
SECREr |

S$. We checked out of the hotel at ‘1B: 33. At 18:40 vo
saw LOGINGY.'s ‘car ahead of us on the Reforma héaded toward
tho Boviet Babassy. Tvo men were in it hoa i did not recognize,

; 8, LILYRIC has LOGDNOY and BARANCV: ‘leaving the Soviet
‘ Babaasy in LOGINOY's car at 15:3€ on 8 March. Neither were
. back by 18:30 when LILYRIC secured, 1 tostantly recognized

| BARANOV's photos asthe Soviet with the canera,

7. Alao per LILYRIC, LOGINOV left the Embassy in his ear
at 09:42 and returned on foot at 20:51. This wag the period ve
were vaiting for Subject, Hovever he could not have goca se
at the Hotel Prince since I left there at 09:50 the first tine
sad at 10:40 the second tine. i

t
|

J
Francis J. COIGNS

“TORET



--- Page 247 ---
14)

as Fel 6K

& ACE

i : . . ‘ “ . . ~ Ye
> ‘¢ ao ~ : ; : : (cA Ae
fF Rollot ¢ = 2199 Lo : Dias Claro
: / Fochas Febrero 13 (KARTES) de 1968 - . CAMARA
Tiempo de Vigiiancias 0800 - 1500 Volooidads “1/150,
/ Diat<cagna: 3.5

YOY ACH:

OBSERVACIONES.__._____..__._. . _...Vehfoules..

i wee etlackasrcrt for Aen oles Sf Car, Pastanotar 269

‘__Sujetos.__ Hora
‘

|)" que poco antes hablaba oon Chern, on. el, ouarte nuevos.

_ Goat ___ | 200 ee
i = - t
i. a ge airiga al gur del BAifioios ___. rea

: ‘noha y_Kola_ , que cvenfan, de. la. reja_prinoipal, platicando - pagan. per.

lla torraza. yondose al .sur. dol. Bdifiolo. nee
vonfa do hablar 008. Selo en. la Porterias pasa. POF la_

terraza y 90 va al sux da} SAifioio __

9 y_unos trabajadores, | pasan_afuera del. ouarto nuevo ¥_ |.

ge_van_al_garage._1015 He._so dirigen aia puerta.__|
....|—--prinoipal del Edifioio.. ..... .- =. ene fe ee eee

4 D959 —~—+Gue.-pooo antes llegaron. al Club, salen- ‘del quarto nuevo ee
__¥_ 8° » dirigen a li la _reja. prinoipal por la o cual selen del Clud- +

Zobn regres al Club _y_yuelve_asomarso_al _guarto nue

wenfan dela. Porterfa, platicando_pasan_po>. la_terraza ————-—_--__-

.

—— jy. g2e_van_al. gur.del- BAifioie.

26. 042 —— que platicaban. frenty al Reoibidors- pagan por la terrasa- see eee
hacia el sur del Edifioios— a :

L__. on a _.en dicho vebfoulo _venfaa. 2 Hombres y una Mujer, mexicans) ———~
eee J. fee Los reoibe log ¥ Juntos entran al Reoibidor, .-.----— mere fe
J a :
\ Log --.--'-—-- |-28. 1122) —- x los aujetoe menoicnados on la. foto 27, platioande --}---———~--
S——_|__|.| __ se dirvigon al recibidor, al parecer don agentes do |.

ee - ~

—Z.Rine 29.320: que_venfan_del_ Recibidor,_pasan_por _ls_terraza hacia.

hie E77

eee bay Ob sur.dal BifLolos—————


--- Page 248 ---
yygooo00

qua



--- Page 249 ---
ls
ha

Z
3
3
a.
ae
wy x
at}
23

A px
Aes

Chee
Bs

oe
‘Y
ale

treed
a
ALE



--- Page 250 ---
~ —
. oc - oT
i
a ‘e * .
~ : Placa 464-,0 -"ooghe’ Dod

medeio 1966 déado-de alta en fu,
cranes

nombre de iGxACIO “AR:

dcomicilic en las calles de
colonia iortales

’
motor 605334 sedén.
%

H ‘ we
i entamente K-10
: .
| i
i 5
i
i
;



--- Page 251 ---
“Tasl
4

4

. ‘ _ ,
12 February ,1968 SA
Heer

1. Agent: » LInEALB/1A

2. Date and Site of Meeting: _— 4000 Tecali Bar,Muriano Escobedo, .
. 1700. . .

3+. Date and Site of Next Meeting: Sane place, sane time, 19/2/68.
4. Adcinistrative: Ko odcinistrative matters discussed.

5. Inforzation/Instruciions Passed to Agent:

Roston advised LINZALH/4 to continue his same line
with his friend Velentin Loguinov. He agreed with
LINEAL /1 that since Loruinov did not bring up the
metver of his "boss" since his first reference: to it
at 27/1/68 at the french Club, Loguinov probably has
not given further thoucht to the matter, (Loguinov
had two opportunities to bring the gatter up again
“with LTac: /4-and did not do 80). : Mt

Rowten also edvised LInSALN/1 to continue to push

LIRELIC/1 into the PKI but apreed that in the light

of the current unce:tainty as to whoa aight omerge

ag the future leader, LIRGLIC/1 should not attach

hinself too firzly to any cne individual, but rather ;
await the outcome of the 27/2/63 convention.

6. Inforustion/ieports Given to Case Officer by. Agent:

LIRUALK/1 save Rovton ‘his reports O50/JF and 054/UF,
attached herewith, tore.her with.the latest LIRELIC/41
report passed tq LIHEALM/4 through the drop. _

! : - ~

. a aye

fat ed

fo . 7” . . : -
CM ay% — COPICS Tite

>

ee rig. 4 A


--- Page 252 ---
050/37
TLSTE LOGUsOy

February 7, 19%, 1655-185 hears
French Club °

ithe for tenats. Val its 'M umes late for our tennis natdi. Tt take
y Susrsets co of working for the coapary.

dhis as neaning (hat he no lon);
at least his a£clons have been sutl. ceenlly a allayot to permit hh to
isk ulssin: &@ comact with uc, Ne obvi Ov . aan Voy ensuers

“te his oorlier provomtion,

ne tale now, Z have the definite fecling
about our necting in & Ce, nor hae ho
reonle. Cur conversition is sporrka wicous, Inana,

beon briefed
and frequently bors

t vo siout Gloria Pinkos Val secmdd centinely bore’ about Gloria.
TS HOt yous Lab Gene aitoty att. amotd ive, athletic, sympathetic, and
roauisel severe? tennis groups, alias careful to include Val, He seers

rsoictive of her offorts ta iis behalf.

questions aa do no provmcative

Ned no Moatin

af it is true

iif T knew

only persont I

woalintt poeslly
ot

1 Oybe 2 tre)

AL that
eg inzevest |

ay

n girls,

Clare

th othor activithes.
thare, and 3 there, but not anday 1
SOT? eotemcoe chelos, plorver diclos, sande

: . that Isas but did.
' Pet od Live! tennis here, cic

: ac ws sel then quoted an postunr ins
wots

7 hevalin. path F devuchad pota.!
4 ;

fuse. hei aly AL


--- Page 253 ---
14-0000. F

‘T refrained fron this a

Februmy 10, 1968. 2100-0200 hours --
Hone of Uloria and Pore Piurte

Toy dinner. Gloria has orga
rate, she invitel all the vertict

a

nised 2 tournanert., Prior to the first
pints to a cocictalledinver in her hoc.

Liste. Val ims Late, exnlainins that wife had a doctors apo
Re also said the’ he had spent the day at a party in honor of th

Vals Asked by 2 provacstive Geman if ho too would
; 1 explained how nost people leave efter three years, or
; the ablassador they have teen sorving leaves. He said there ws a rossi-
bility that he 2ight loave, but he refused to ress his opinion about such
@ Likelihood, : :

1. 2 “id Val,
or, Sn the caso of the Geimin, cose as close as possible to insulting hin.
“cb. I astol Val if ho vero aliays treated aska
sort of A novelty at ‘parties, with people atlaccins hin. He said no, but
that uost parties were diploneis or his Sovict con:unity, He explained
the Germans beliaviour as typical of the rerusichted, Llinforsed and vulzar
dermans, . : .

rerby rough on Val. Everyone at the party seczol to want to }

. . . on
Alexandtia svoke Little dering the evening and needed hKolp

1 frequently ® explain iat wis said in Spanish. Novever, she seens.

yery Imtoblicent and voy oils,



--- Page 254 ---
1 February 1968

‘0 : Chief, Cuba

FROM 6: )«(C/SB
SUBJECT; Valentin LOGINOV (P-11712)

1, LIMITED reports that on 16 January 1968 LOGINOV
entered the Soviet Embassy at 17:11 in his own car (19 DA).

He was still in the Embassy at 19:00 when LIMITED went off

dutys

ae

2. LILYRIC was not working on 18 January.

Francis J, COIGNE

he
i
1

: 1
fod
ig
Pog
bo
' i



--- Page 255 ---
t
i.
i
i

come ecard nee en rm nen nee imennnen yatelneetrt es sane :

Valentin Sergeyevich LOGINOV P-11712

“el vst & Elev bu ——

ot a cht Ye fl January 24, 1968.

vA

Source : BHFernald

Le A check at the building confirms that Subject lives at

Ignacio Eeteva 21 - apt. 2. Neat the door bell at the main entrance

in the slot corresponding to spt . 2 Subjects name appears t VoSeLOGIHOVe

2.'° «fhe building ie quite new and at's floors. The let (ground) floor
housea the Instituto de cronometrologia, and mt on the 2nd 3rd floor

. there are 2 apt fer floor. The building Las no garage.

. 3. Apparently there is no portero in the building because there is
--> no bell for the portero. The "interphone" enables “tenante to. identity

visitore and open the door electrically.

Puan e



--- Page 256 ---
“256



--- Page 257 ---
»fUSeE

op DeNI77

DLTES OF MESTINGS: 11 and 19. January 1968

o

1. I met t Subject in his room at ‘the’ Del Paseo Hotel from.

LALS@15L5. on 11 January ‘and from 1415-1515 on 19 January. The

- next neeting will be arranged. by telephone.

Sts. As of 19 January, Subji

_talxed with any of the Soviets since his “telephone ‘conversation.

with LCGINOV-on 28 September. Subject: did, however, receive a

Christzas card from LOGINOV. ith my agreement, Subject sent
inoxp. pens sive (gifts along with Christmas cards to LCGI NOV and
CLAYKYOY, but they weren't delivered until the week of co
January. _ Subjest explained’ that before Christmas,’ ‘he assigned
his salesman the job of de2ivering a score of Christmas gifts,
ineluding LOGINOV'S and CHAYKHOV'S, around-town, but shortly
after christmas, found that the salesman had fot delivered any

of them. This discovery caused Subject to fire the salesman,

_who had been increasingly derelict in performing his job over

the pact féw months and who, Subject had recently learned, had

begun taking dope. Subject consequently: wrote "better-late-than- —-

never” notes on the cards accompanying the undelivered gifts and

hac his new salesman deliver them. I have instructed Sub Ject to

leave the initiative for the next contact up to the Soviets.

“3. Soliman GOUARY. . Subject ran into GOHARY on the street

“one day during the first week of January. GOHARY. seemed delighted —

np PHEBBT Cat) P/0,056C re. ha
R N7X Cal) 29097

COMES MADE

PPr7/2

i
t
t
i


--- Page 258 ---
14-00000

»

ptm enn enh ann sent omen dit Biante ata abc vob ct eee,
“ : : ita ign? beeen ties

cated tee = eine teem co
~ ety

_ SUNEGT: - Polfeaaan recruited by LOOIV.

“J, This esse: atarted about fifteen months ago- and.the only info we
kmov. of ts the § PATROV. asked the policedsa to
check on, Ta the esse active? wnat requirerents are being given to

ths -policeuan ty
Soviots deen invwlved? en tiold specialises in US operations. Ne sited

. way be Ebving- the policemen as
i na4“and let ‘us kmoie what the statue is.

Orig to JKR « fo tite f )
185-694. Pyne fe
? fie on LOOINOV !

EGINOV? Are any Americans involved? Have any other:

94 gnoent.s in supoort of his US opera ti. ng 7

“e,


--- Page 259 ---
: "RR ARREST et THEI oars pene y
° " : ; ; .

ae © ‘..
: me yy, a oe
| Chettes jon :

nigel tc ne
DGine Kaze Lei folye A Mp hene =



--- Page 260 ---
DO ee ace mtiae b ee ce age
et . oof,
a : . .
Boot
a .
Pn te
« ? s .
: a ke : .
2. q- ; Lek yl
a. fre Ee OO OA
; 3 ee ak rn

mnt erent rte nner anne secant


--- Page 261 ---
“Vesue mM yee

dt bbs fore -
é ond & —.

7 . 1 7 .
ff . . . . ‘
wo 4 Lo. ve ——
So enenescnateqeen ne tinea meyer ees
pe
i

F hermes edie finan ee ot

as. nebo te Menet ‘ds oe me Hos a


--- Page 262 ---
eimmetiinede meneame

ty

I

- 66

1. In reviewing “LOG INOV's SPR whieh WEENING has ‘just

_ completed, I noté that LOGINOV recruited ithis policeman
+3. months ago and that. his first requirement was on the _

- BOESTROM couple, At that time we gave “LITEMPO~8 traces on -
LOGINOV saying that he was a dangerous KGB officer,
LITEMPO-8 subsequently mentioned that the case was continued
and that he, himself, was directidg it. | :

Rs If you think that LITEMPO-8 will, _cooperdte, t would

- Like to know the following about™ this case: | se

(a) Is it ‘still active?

(b) Did the policeman. pass info to. LOGINOV ee
‘on the BORSTROM couple? If so, what? Was ao .
there any follow-up?

(c).. What ‘type of ‘requirensits hae. LOGINOV
given to the policeman? Are any Americans
dnvolved?

(a), Have any other Soviets 1 been “involved vith : : wee
this case? =| ~

we ae
(e) Who as handling hima while LOGINOV aS in the shes f,
USSR, on yasation (be left Mexico on 16 JulyF?. weal |

‘is’ for discussing this. case you ‘could mention °
ie are especially concerned about, LOGINOV because. he. ve
tried to recruit a chauffe
ried to develop a female Foreign Service ..
ight also say he is running a sensitive

case into the US (false). Thus many of his: request to the
_ policeman may be in support of American operations although
“* this would not necessarily be apparent, Therefore we would
- ike to know what be te asking for. Qur traces would help

both ourselves and LITEMPO-8, etc,

SECR™



--- Page 263 ---
RS RET AES

8's reaction,-you might even

2 advantage of LOGINOV's absence froa

Mexico in the USSR to reques~ elacciones not to give him &

pew, visa because of Bis Antelli ncé activity as detailed by
‘EMPO- f

Distribution: . ; no
y= Pa11712 ——— .
1 = 5Q-6-91/2

SECRET



--- Page 264 ---
t

. STATE DEPT DOCLUENT

| MEMO FROM LEGAL ATTACHE

; DATE: 10 JANUARY 1963

‘| SUBJECT: INSTITUTO PE INTERCAMBIO CULTURAL

i MEYICANO-RUSO,, NORELIA (MEXICAN .
RUSSIAN INSTITUTE OF CULTURAL EXCHANGE, -
MORELIA) (105-1016 - 1/10/68) -

CLASSIFICATION: SECRET

Ta ad id kc da al Cal i a

eo



--- Page 265 ---
ates
.

: - — 5 a Opy

j

:

: ‘

. ROK CHF note: BIRTHDAY COULD BE EITHER KOLOMYAKOV's OR MIROSHNIKOV's, 1 :

NORTYOEFERENT DATES OF BIRTH IN JAN 1926 FOR BOTH THOUGH. VLADINER RLIMGY
KORNYUKHIN AND SOLOMATIN WERE A'SQ SC3N 1928 (OAY AND MONTH 3 ok

” ANYONE'S GUESS IS AS GOOD AS Mt : ee

fea ie nee cone “ecqemueibins en itn ewan

|
|

. ee c>.
Out to 11-09-60 at 1255] Locmava_ostée: KALYSIIEVA for fvanova~and
vagia her when did enby cone back. Last nicht., Yoll,. they aro |
cathoring tenorroy’ evening at tho Enbassy to colobrato /aoncone

hoth birthday ana there utll be @ Lot of poopie and they have toy. -

. - i
/long Siscusaton/. Alricns, but

silvor -pitchor and tro cla S
of Enslish for tho kids. #ino}

lot's koep HATASEA as eg to

progont him with a pift. Let's upto a collection and bay nim a |

211002 |
i 61 2—
0V97
P_6SE

156055
11 ene, 1953



--- Page 266 ---
mers)

SECRET , . eo
- oe |
. LL Janusry 1968

SUBJECT; Violt of-Untdentified Woean to Soviet Eabassy gromds = | Mo oft

i

|

i

; Le LICALLA résorted that-at 1203 hours on Tuesday 9 January 1968,
: an unidentified woasa, described by LICALLA as 8 "Horthsmerican type”

|
entered the Sovict Embassy. This wouan entered the receiving roos. : |
and cama out into the courtyard of the Soviet Embassy grounds at | :
1206 hours. While in the garden (courtyard) ohe spoke to Yuriy. fe
8. ¢ +: H (P13042), Vladislav Sergeyevich KORMUSHEIN (11707) i
aad to Visdinir Agafonovich DOLGOV (7-9774), Frou 1215 bours l
watil 1226 hours, when she again entered. the reception room in the {
codpsny of Valentin 5. LOGINOY (P-11712), she spoke in the

countysrd to DOLGOT. LICALLA reported that this unidentified woxen

{
departed the Soviet Eabasay at 1252 hours.
2. Attached ‘for Vladiniz A: DOLGUYS(P9774) file are LICALLA |

H

{

|

photos of this woman taken with DOLGOV. (FOR WOFIRM USE ONLY).

. ao ma _ Grace H. PARMILANT
; oe 83

So #9774 wate
oa : P+.13042 w/o/ect
"we An7o7 wfofate

. Be 11712 wfofatt — ~y ve oe



--- Page 267 ---
CONTACT REPORT
_.suBJECT } LICOZY+5 -
pare or MEETING =: (6 january 1968 >

1. I met Subject at the Koala from 09:15 to 09:50, 1°)
-will call him in the week of 15 January. to arrange delivery —
of his liquor. . ‘ toe,

2, Subject gave me the travel info on IVANOV which has- : ;
already been forwarded to San Jose. :

3, Subject reported that LOGINOY visited hima few days:
before Christmas bearing 6 bottles. of Vodka, red and black ot a
caviar and a lacquered box. He mentioned that NIKOFOROV and | oo :

-KORMUSHKIN had had a car accident. Also that NECHIPORENKO had Soa Oo an
arrived but that either he or someone in his. family had been . mo “

_ sick ever gince arrival.

. 4, LOGINOV used the occasion to renew the old pitch. He. :

gaid that with the celebration of the 50th anniversary every- i.

body is contributing. What would LICOZY-5 sontribute? Subject Z

then gave LOGINOV a pair of sun glasses with a built in transistor : t

radio (as a Christmas gift). LOGINOV gaid he meant not personal : :

“favora but something for the cause, He then asked Subject to oS
spot a Mexican employee of the American Eabassy. Subject Hl
laughed at hin and repeated all the old arguments about not: a
working for the Scvs, He told -LOGINOV that, if he wanted to
be frionds, then stop bringing up these old requests. . :

Francis J. COIGNE

Distribution: ep PL - 2 .
Orig - P=-2712 po . Do. ‘

pads PHl11712 po a . ; :
| fle



--- Page 268 ---
SECRET

5 January 1068

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

SUBJECT : Berta *NAVARRO, Member of Fuersas Armadas do
America Latina (FALA) Soe ,

. BOURCR a LICOZY=5°

. 1. Source stated ‘that Subject te the sister-in-law of
his old friend Lic. Juan © ‘NA who used to be in Rolac=
eiones and ie now Sub Director General of Accion Social of
-the Departamento del D.F. Subject is the sister of SALDANA's

wife, Fernanda and is 24 years old. :

i 3. A few weeks ago SALDANA brought Subject to Source
. asking the latter to give. Subject a job.- Bubject told
Source that .she had formerly worked at UNAM and had been
: arrested in a group which had bombed the Bolivian. Embagsy in.
_ Mexico, She was held and interrogated but because of SALDANA's
‘influence, she was released after 2 months without charges.
However, the police refused to let her work at UNAM and told
her that they would have to approve any job she undertook,
- She still has to report to the police every 3 days. Bubject
told Source her story. because she know that the police would.

check with hia,
- -§, Subject told Source the following about herself and
the FALA: _ ;
a. ‘The FALA has-76,000 members.

sat fee b. -Hex superiors told her that the PCH tipped off
the Mexican authorities about those involved in the

bomb throwing. The PCH did this because. terrorisa is
against their line and harns the peacful diffusion of

Conmunian. . ony

- @. Tho FALA works on the coll basis go, that oach.
member knows only a féw people. However, whe worked

as liaison. between Moxico and Poza Rica and knows sore
‘embers there, -The FALA monbera’ in Poza Rica are Perex.
workers. . : fod .

4. he FALA is financed by the Cuban Embasoy.

TM eee pemegel

Pe erd



--- Page 269 ---
ern oe nn ent ne,

wee SECRET . ~

4. Valentin 8S. LOGINOY (Pe11721) came into the office
a fow days after Subject started work and asked about her
(she ts replacing Mirtam AVILA Katz). Source gave LOGINOV a
brief resume of tho above, | LOGINOV's only coment was.
“they are nuts," .

-&. There are no traces oa Subject, but taere are several:
cards on SALDANA. . ; oe _ a ;

Nabe

“Francis J, COIGNE

File; : ot . ° ‘
Orig = 50-928 . : .
“l= Pu2712
1 = P~i1712 :.

‘abe


--- Page 270 ---
46%

a enn pe a
an «
cad 2 °
. \
a Dates devyonboy 2s, 2oc7
To: - 1k, Henry -Doarboru

Dopity Chiog of Micoion

tire: Wallace ve Stuart :
Courisoler’ for Political. Aetatee

Nathha Ls ForFia . Joe _ ‘

Legal Attacho ae Toe gt ae

su be musrrrio bE merencarn10 CULTURAL, MEXICANO-RUSO ee
LEXICAN-RUSSIAU INSTITUTE OF CULTURAL EXCISE), or

aire ALAGARA, JALISCO
: 205-367 (11-23-67)

This document is for the uce of your
agency’ only and neither it: nor. its

- ’ contents’ should be further. distributed.

: without appropriate authorization. ,

7 ‘Enclosed aro two nenoranda, dated ‘and captioned:
as above, which may be of intoreat to Yous, ou. -

Enclosures @)

>a “winston M, Scott (nes.-2)
we Aray Attache. (Enes.~8)_ . re

. Anoridan Consulate Goneral, Guadalajara Gines.n2
© arougn ¢ Counsolox for Consular Asfaira)” .

re rn, - h .

| ° Group 1 j
| Exeluded from automatic
downgrading and
dectassification-



--- Page 271 ---
L10Ki, GUVs Os DE TERE

eources T=1" ~UgUSt 3, 1537 |
a Weavers of tae T1CM2 at Guacalesare held « nicaic for
‘wisitors st the. IZ Covyiet Cultural veex at Caspals, Jalisco, oa
august 3, 15i7, lesting Zrom 2:35 2.6. uatil F199 Det. Moted.
aucag tue visitors vere the Zoliovinz; gD / "

fle

LIL 2HNITIAS “fk O2d°

Hoy. P= I

SORTS. 305 X0ui1 7. ia 22-0

VILDSNIR AUICEEIV Mo

2) | Frofeccor si02T/HA LOKe.ave
“SULNISLEV CHIC. Posi

a : . Tae II Goviet Cultural ees at Guadslejera, Jalisco,
f degen on Lugust 7, 1057, ita a reception at tae ZIG oziZice
with about 703 bersoas present. Iotec enong tae persons present
were. the Zolloving: SOWIT SOLCOLUINOY, 2ORIL ULZLNTORY, .
ViLOSMIS. SURELY, Frofesso> (DELTA LEWISILL, SLANICLAV OYCURY,
 SOTSLLL IND. > and VALSNTIiT LOUGTUOV. «o£ cocktail party was aeld
after the inauguration cereudnies, anc many Russicn sad ot3er
Iron Curtain country usgacines vere given vue vubic,

om,

source: T-1 co : éugust 22, 163

. On the night of fuguct 10, 1324, Russinn jocunentel
type movies vere snomm to scout. 110 persons at ties cocial Security
Taeatre xt Guacelajare..- ‘aese movies vere. Sponsored oy the

TICM. . , - . -

“wouree: Ted gugueé 22, ace

OM the night o2 Zugust 1X, 1¢57, asout cf persoas vere
entertained oy ERUSCTO 222460 anc Lins COCA playing the violin
and tae vieno. This event cing Sponsoret oy tae IISM. 25 part of

‘tae IT soviet Culturel Jee,

Cowviventi¢n ~*~

te



--- Page 272 ---
I

4-00000

qn

2 —
AT EE Ch

2O0liowing meetin:

g the months of Cetober

studied from 1700 to 100,

nvified Soviet phoned

WAS GUE

house) end - ely y

requested her to inform L/L +t:

that day. : 6
No reason was given, either

for this cancellation.

: ce. Classes

1530 to 1900,

& Concharenko studieé from . *

several pocket books L/2. to procure for

hin. L/1 selected then from nis own
he did not cere what subjects were

his reading 3

. ’
Feed books which hed either vto

& took on sefonee

mS antants, s oa
reicularly interested

kook om Sollet, a.

Grind



--- Page 273 ---
. aot ! . 4 Y
. + .
“ : e : flo
Pe) 8 ag 4 wt oe .
9 : GS wd @ red at 4 43 a
7) iz) Ke} ee a Q Oo 4 teh
Ps) ‘oO wt Pp oO) Od 3 sy Ww
ra Be 2 9 4 Oo «« &
te fs Ss og et aka M--4 OL ie.
' ° at a on Cm sf
Bo @ ) 9 98 ss 9
a ry i: Reed ge ir SS |
by a4 whe whoo “iy vad
at a2 4), oy my She . ay
ry is} be 1) co) 3 "dwt
a CS a be by Ott
oO 2 i ®. re of
nd , 4 . ‘ a ke
2 fe foe d o- 9
se oO: a 2 . 4 uF fa he
fh oO Yi g ot + a.
pr, EB 9 9 4249 4 wt a) ote
44 OO oY cs Bow hw. g
te) 9 a) a isn OS
a Sed a oS Y C4 8
uy ° at go re ees er
3 oe - Ho us] Wey ” ")
oy Prd Bo og og @ Qoob to 2 .
: ad 9 “a 8 OQ 4D
b "yO fi wo ooa
uy » OF eo oo.
p a 4 of t Mm nF he oa
£ i fo ee wf 43
fh 19 ao op a i
L fy Hoot owed ol 42
S “f ald 3 4 - oo 8 9
A 4 Q * q Ba ‘ at
L8 4 a8 wy PM
b . " Oe ol t
ob 3 co)
a o n wl wee
go ft 2 “oO “yg re) a
3 a? Poo Q- ty
ve ™~ oF ues y si
Yoga ? HY 4: if
3 ist ve eed 5g
«4 1 2.0.0
9 ooo ti :
p> n ”n . a
oD et “ 3
fh pS, 3 .
9 g ft ft :
te 4 oO, mye te
" 4 . OW a
o° 4d oO
, 4 a
" 44 E be +
an rj "9 sf on nthe
y eo hy rho
& fhowp  @ a
“a ao A ost
my i hod . 3 D2 Dy
an woody ad ot ah Be
an el "4h Me 4a
fd Cn ce ed GF
im . Qe dog ne,
ne a Cn at Oo oat
ory Q Woof tI wt
ia} bbs} y A 3 fe on:
se “
BES Hoa y
. foo ws
a 8 By a OW OO tt 4 oa
pore.

we tarees ery caimat ances alent aig mimbteratenytmace eat can hates mr yeNin sete tet» pth nvon Gm nanos te ee



--- Page 274 ---
-I/1, exboldened 3

ittechels

coset

ara
One Ge. Ola ks

ete
paenss

his scvual

and 2 nenvys Goat oe) precesniix

fron coLovcd. . GOL

transaintec in a

ta then ell
Ve hod &i2

se vi sibiy- pieased and

sale he vould try an

ed

pronounce

co) ot 10 Decemzer vas -.-

Baer



--- Page 275 ---
*

~s

*
.

2

26ses ©
3

ae

a

v
sses

ele

LORRR

©)

snout

4

seey
reited

im

4

EVE

26

“ag
">

2
2
g
3
Q
i3
1
3

yoo

eeren

o
ay
Yi
3
is}

So

nats
fare:

3
‘
‘

Grrt

Q eomiter
wt

VY entere:

a
ee)
4

os

“TSSY

1

told TAZé

fie

naked

Voze

De

>

ad
+
i

very explic

oe dite! #6!

and

u
€
‘
r

/

that PAZAl

é

Bceversrec

allenge

its ¢

y
pat
+

2y

ver

Ce

S
fa.

et

p

a)

a)

£3)

o

a

"

i

°

o

3

a

fa

st
cm
Bas
Ya
as
og.
Aas
VB
Oo cy
et nM
a
[eared
f
OF
"3

vt
ao
nO

axe)

a.

a

of

Ite tanks

Ws

its wl
o nad

tS d

Wa

Bz
?

o

td
ry

@ to

7

28

ivrome

ae

piprescon

to
Bie

Sz
eae)

RAT ON

SI

go"

sO0Me

LOSS

T

whe

oF

antics

steep tem
pen Creare ttre eons

are

eigne tn
wions In wt

7S

BlLts.

psemenrred

ely asd

3

9
5

‘
s

TASTE OD 5



--- Page 276 ---
at
el
a
oO
.
o
4
ad
ae)
4
e .
tho
74
oad
' ta 4 “ft
. 3 a be
od
.

2750 1

nee d

+

itis

ery

Denes
Surme

at

a
Pe

ae
VEG

fa

* Q
ilo 3
By wd “Ss
peed i
ue 8 oe
riod
ays oO
fa 42 Ga
mo “i
Me .
3
nN
AL:
“>
ory
9
aoa
ng!
3.
a.
o
Hl
ip)
wa;
a
or
al
ie
©
.

tes,
. a
Me
toot
ye
jt
“ANG
iS
“yt
a
ot {
Be {
no
oO
we,

¢ flu.

zat

a4
.

35%
whtn

LL x

ZL

4
4
>
a]
4

L
€

atk

betuveen

whe:

cone)

ot rec

$a

what

as

on

5
ered

°
"1,

evist

VG

oser

p>

1

re

ces}

on 1%

vt

5)

° 1

sy td rai
dou ;
be 4? i.
ye 1
© t5 4

go!

Peal
tomes

Dy

a.
ad

eget ere



--- Page 277 ---
14-0000

_ in two of thece months.

ormation (2uii name,

ease

6oGn An atte:

ENSON and to. moniter the

_vesening

Exe ae : :
4 a
Tl ey 7 .



--- Page 278 ---
ee

son ee
ELEN VAS:

yar seteees

&

sO ok

tue

¢ 's. ~

oat
Bou Gg

8

Ste

Ne

Rete eos

2egn

L9GS, 2hTh

is

rie meen enn

LIROCKET=1 Contact Report

67

x

a
>
e
a
_”
“a

—

=
5
od

3



--- Page 279 ---
f-00000
- he

. and

> > .
et ‘ se «te
3 i -
. ve ee “
.
— ce ae bor
Ere wae PPaer
HTS gs CLES

avo al VE Clad, so
: vegeta fan oe AY
UCV RL/C7 Loy 1

i. bon
rape gPa
ce
of
en ont ;
2 7a On Hexice,D poe
. . i
S.- puoate cesde wo nob-ne, Rios 2 bom t -
atenada Col bareo cyoaio TVERO OL po
i ZA Cas" ecr2 atondides, este burce cntre el dia be
: €o hov7./c7 a Progroso, Yucatcn.. ee wes sous aH
~ x _1o.paso Sox velefcno 22 Sr, Higuel, ol ¢1a 8 do Nev,

ne Bots infornecion 3 2
: {8%ey a les & y 45 Petiy, Dov hs
dv Vorasrus.e wo

besscwo pasado el dato dfrocta:

3.0

Neaaifliosto éo Consiga
Go nachonaliead Ruse, "Lux
€ol Puerts dol Marlel, rrov
Hebionde llogadoe al Pucrte ds
co L867 ,<

, Sripulentos del barco ruse sxx

Veracres, a cargar maiz oL dic & Go Nov, |

re

2 Pos. NSXL KOHSOMOL" quo entro ol
Bev. /67., procedonta del Harlel, Cuva,~ eo ,



--- Page 280 ---
|
qd.

i
:
j
i

Leica on QDMA Cen SLE Kew dex

/
yi .

yy
p4/ ee / on

A

*
;

005 -_ {
Lor, vatontin £2 //7/2— Pv yh
Novenber 2, 1967. 1130 hours. oe
Casal contact, Loguinov was entering the French Club’as t ws leaving.
‘He asied-ne to stay Jong enoush to play a couplé.of suts of tenis with -
hin. I had-to decline due to previous aoanittamnts. Wo: both agreod to look
for each other for temis sono day aftar tho 50th anniversary ealobmtions ”
‘next week. oo . toe Se :

Noveabér 11, 1967, 1100-1200 hours.
~ Sources Direct. At French Cub.

Attitute, Loguinay seenod very friendly and anctous to contime our friendship,
His notives, however, seea strictly for tennis, _ : oo.

; Companion, Earlier T saw Loguinoy laying tennis with a mther tall and
heavg—sot person who; left when ‘Loguinoy Appreached ny wife and se, later,
when dressed, thhs. person passed by to Say goodbye to Loguinov, in Russian,
He is obviously an eubassy type, - ; . .

Novexber 12, 1962). copy A fe]

Source: Direct. At Frénch lth. .
Noes Bireok, AY Frgnch Ch Z.W3

Loguinov played tennis with stil2 another wember of his exbassy. We did not “
have an Opportubity to talk-on the courts. We did see otch other in the showers.
He showed great. interost in playing Soon and said he would all ne te arrangs
the date ani tina.: Ho Yoked that I should bring some o° ny frienis fro, tho exa,
bassy, all of wioa! aro GL\. wo onuld hive an internuional toumazent. I told
hia that none of ay frients playoi tennis, He nisunlors.ood ani thought I said
that I knew’ no-one ‘at tiie @abassy—she looked disippointai. I correctad hin ant
sald that I did intood, know -eabassy Peonlo, but that none playat temis and that
T doubted very nuch! if’ sy frients wore CIA, FBL or anything: O14 ,

nent of nixed doubles which begins tonorrow. I too have been invited and accepted.

ele 8 ome

i + é we PT oe
BF Sao 8 Lo Sg ER, we } aan.

2 area

haps REC erat AT BOD AES oN
| Byscer Lp yg as

La peeceee® ALE
vs eed ar? DUE

Ceisty dts wry

De ORE A a Deen



--- Page 281 ---
- LICALLA- 2 DECEMBER 1967

\ ANOTHER INTERESTING KCB TRIO?

is
|

i ~

i :

| i “

H on .

:
ae
i
: i

XRAPOREX

Valentin LOGINOV, Oleg NECHIPORENKO (arrived FOS 29 NO 1967),

and Pavel YATSKOV, whom NECH fa replacing.

File: Pe11712



--- Page 282 ---
14-0000

4 . . SECRET. ~
. aii -™: (WHEN FR UC0 IND — ure
~ ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET _ :
a INSTRUCTIONS: ; ; J
‘ NOP TO FUNG TO: ACTION BRANCH
. B | b- Futan Sect. 2 on back. Detach back tap Tit te no ard titte shown are not proper,
ani forward to 1P/ADB. i insert proper tile no. below and forward
7 2 Destrsy trant cover shoot. unless it records document to IP/AN.
& Zgnihcant action taken of comments requit~
‘ing preservation. _O :
TO: ALL ADORESSEES.

FILL IN SECTION 1 ON BALK. it APPROPRIATE,

orrcees

11 ts the respcnuiility of the SSO orea
Gara. to Green Field Files tor duplication
fond Ineorpotare in CS Headquarters Files,
per Chiet, $3

€¢@6eeeeee86ee60e86

Bo lon gerne ene eee
[Pe 0nd 8 kote TAA eet tase ®

1

i Be yen gee
i yO? MUA BIISL


--- Page 283 ---
1409800

Ie

ae 7 > a,
Dl f § Pp ¥¢ CUS PROCESONG ACTION
1 . .
19
Chief, Seviet Bloc Division ; . wo emteone OUERED
me. ° | _ oxy Qualmra Dt
- Chief, Western Heasi phere Division : (Ade RUDGE DEDETONG
_Acting Chief of Station, Mexico City 2% — _: Ror

OS valentin Sergeyevich Loctnov "(202~265h12)
ACTION REQUIRED . REFIRENCES . .

_ Forwarded herewith are the Statvon's Fersonality File on- | Subject
for inclusion into nie Headquarters 201-File. The File has been

- purged of all Headquayters correspondence,

i

ayer

Distribution:
cys - C/SBD w/atts h/w.
. icy - C/A xlofatts-
siyehn dy ae on 22 se 7a

Lott. (A avi. fasted %I- p26) ts Chey ; 8
crass TO OMPAITH SYMBOL AND MEDSER: ‘DATE .
Heata-b2e61 16 August 1972
CASPANGA HOS RUE WusSt
SECRET Pe -casule

y

eran


--- Page 284 ---
X-RES. SHEET”. S-E-C-R-E-T / DATE

XAREFe : SYMS. NUNBER DOC. OATE

= 207-0285512-... . HMMA-38637. .- . ~ 1b MAR 70. -

TO THE 204 EILE CITED UNCER LEFT MARGIN.

CALL FILES SECTION, EXTENSION #127.

|
i

21/03/78 ..

ouc. FILED IN -

201-0789963. ...

THE ABOVE COCUMENT(S) ARE CROSS-REFERENCED

FOR INFORMATIGN CONCERNING THE LOCATION OF
THE FILE CONTAINING -THE RECORD COPY QCCUMENT, ..---

FILE INC Sercenssel? >

.
° - _
wo S-E=0 $8 ET : ED TyPoET cL_s¥_onaers
LJ


--- Page 285 ---
. Lo +
Yojeet wos fifteen hinut seting scieauiail for

elaining a terrific hangieer ad cada..tion, having spent mess
of the grettoug night with REx, driv. 0 7 his ¢yes were very
Clecr, tut]then he is qiite young.) Ian ite s: f ‘ediazely, upon

his arriv:} end after nal ing his exsi tion tor “baing Iste he ad” dt that

Dut at end of the un, : .
Reefing he walved to his ear parked ely half a blocs away from the cafe.
f Walined ‘wats him and coucented on Ms. earlier 1 Teva:t regarding rep.irs tut
aying- anything about it. - : : ,

weeh 2, 5 iJect had not yet seen IU3GY but sidd that he Planzed to attend

a par aljeyedly to be givon ty inudaila - ~ (nod Sersio's wifes)
/ at which the he will attea-t to elsic!+ info rz LUBAT's recent trip. © :

Indidentally, Subj. stated that 3. ioothad returned to Sexico 3 or

& months |

oe (It md ben ry nding that Serzio was sali in..
“oscon.)

ubject hag not seen either of theo

3.8 hatted no great len LS ny: tnnog’us tonics, Rug vian ~
literat re food, pte. at rint I attented to have hi

z 2 bagged orf,
ef a 1030 hour
yo 3% ishig to be in goot dra:
Pag at thip * (Perse .alioryy I aa nos.
work ina fest a. ee
ke Datang ou sise
[ta aA wly of 7 : c :
elt try. eo a

cing az
sting at

tw his en
> 35? cafe for th.

ay for a shor 4
* can: join tdi.

i e wat hing for 3ud3 T "EE Mes airs A3norte
vhen Subject - ut bf) wey
é in heating and
X ee oi Tpalt
fs Céiend, who-is stuijing
hd ka i terrh
to ra go we cells bh

“date wit:

: aigusie

PS cte .
" T teld hin 3
at thty

it re jalre -
understood

Selo. t Ly a steang sockhe, vane,
aetat lo forse cc pL atin eat ere ne:

i - wan ler 92!
: fTpOne By ha ts cortstaty fiat

70 leva @

Bey ant
agree hing che Preah te tase ot of Us cafe ata Maw LNW Pp
dstley avrroundinsg aal given cs seetcug bete Ging ar te oat

tila da alt avent. (843 to eurty toe wy toll auatyer he cea he Dan gt



--- Page 286 ---
i
t
:
1
i

down cnt ¢ te clouds to face reality ani I Ana the 8 rather dull daily
@aistencey I think -e would Line to be, and myte Us, an avid reader of
Mteratura, ferhaps he ectertains thouthts of becoming a whiter aoreday.
Ha apvare: tly enfoys putting anay a good ‘eal of alcohclie bevers ese

; . KBR Aree

ee
Douglas *, Of: 4
:

it

ty
\
1

4



--- Page 287 ---
Avcust €, 1962 {

Contact Report : i” v
fubject: Jinzy canont (?=13,270 : _ ae
Zete of Keet: aug § at Continental Rest from 260) to 2330 hrs.

i. The meet vag prearranged ané S cene en tine. The purpose of the. . j
' vious evening and ‘Proceed with the ‘filling of the PA ag rell ae to. .

give necessary ope” inotruction. ~The Purpore ras aciieved, - °

t

meet was to debricf S on his reet sith 106 which took plece She pres |
i

!

H

Next meet; duguot, 13° “at the ‘saze tine end place. | i

|

1

2. “The fact that LOG. started the neet ~ith a talk abcut hooke
appeared to € to he curious. Yo Goutt that LCS wae peddlinz sone Communkt
tdedloricsl tid bits, eepectelly, yustifleation of Sov “Literrational
policy. friefly, too auch freedom irc not rood: Americans and sheir foreign

: policy is naive; they worry more ator! the rorld osinion than about

IF

> a though, he 2id not mention it tev

their aat‘onal intereet: !f they teat to de something ey consult every=
body and a ‘erything to find out an eves old "act that ncby can satisfy
ever;bocy; Nixon? trip to Rumanie was outrigh: a provocation aimed at

Sov Vrion, srcept, if it wae oe product of nexvenese. : oy

3 S vie resiiy surprised to near iv’ civineg up so eaily on the

3. s

tatter of the US Im) phone dine io org, but ke was outricat disarpointed

leuen LOG stated that. he nor eng of Sov Unk |S atale ond sont to meet :

with Luc. Turther, § wes ci. vakec up when he direcily told that i ras '

ty Ve Sov agest aselened to collect inf. about 3ed China e-i Nat Chinese i
po licy concerning Sov = Red Chinese ensiliot frse a Suinese Dab official.

ALD, it was obviois thet S did not

A

ike at “all the idea that big coney Tas sgoten tut there cv Pnention of

_ poney richt now, t.e. during the pariod wy rill be wortiugs on rian lig

“follow our tustricston. The ac fala: ‘to plecra >

TANCE confidence”. : : :
. _ . i

4e P reminded 5 chat ke told hin at thedy peoavicis coet concerning

the Chinese ang ihed thet it it wee ust clear thea

thes he did

his invesverens with
whet ® aeent Loo Ferelled £¢ ont in clenr teers, © costented
not vant to go te rea T8 hefore Pre Yiug iu 7, epeehenl be —-nhed to e.
Pen ono Sond end on the :

voce



--- Page 288 ---
Ne I AN TLS S MAN ELD CE" “SERIE EIT AEDT RAE fe BN pli | 0 LR RA EL i SL EOS Bs. OH TK ~ aig

-2-

that ‘gona thing

oo. other to appeeso tiie (s)omn fear from the cere poacihility
oe night co rrong end he would kave notaere to turn to. F told him that |
eoing to TANG ONLY in counection with the natter of pub) ishing the orticle |
eculd do him.no nara; denying heving contact with LOG recently 16 not |
sufficient; TANG could bring up the quectisa for an cstensive purpore =~ [ ;
of wanting to eend a message to S Sov friend and the fact of not eeelng .
each other during the pact 2 - 3° weeks means nothing Hosde-as thing, be= |

}

eauce £ is supposed to be able to reack a friend; £ cust vo realy ‘to

s

“ aeet any question by TANG not by denying previous statenente but by :
Gnphasizing that he wee thinking carefully about what he told TANG: and _
he reached ‘the concluaton that that vould rettiz hin in a situation — i-
he wee never before “and, conrequently,knors ao thing about possible. con=—
“sequences; therefore, he decided to keep out a field he is igaorent ine -

5. Ae for-ac the other requirements concerning the ohinese are

concerned, >. told & *¢ do nothing for the time being and, erpecially,

: to keepmay foc trying te ascertain the urmas of Lexrloane vorkia, in

- the chines? Bm. G chould clei. thet Le wee spending his tiwe on trying

to get the neve of thea next Ireiidentinl candidate before the Pre eident

eends the name ef tho cend‘date to FAI for approval. Further, & can | 4

Alvays be inino more aurry than LOT wee to cet lim an ansver oa the LO

platinua deci. :

. 4 Oe in upite of hie reactione concerning the businens part of ths

v meet, © wac fIatte.c4 with LM invitition to epend a dey with nis and
hire Jan ly in Cuastue "to celebrate his birthday together", ° acked F
ruild it be appropriate if Le ane Szsephine took s preeent to ure. LO, .
as for exauple, a eilver vrveca or rom reth tug etzilar, F teld hio that’

could take for fre. LCT and the tey wae a tox of chocolatte

value of ME 4G,0 fu Fold net leply thet be would pay for

aa

the saxtnus ry
eend.e? la tl
it. |
l- . ‘rend throu. the reasind r of tig FAQ aca
wae ote to slve very for nnmcra (2 he Gil net Save an apestunity so
oteerve LOS in the errohe of “ile actly ard tn conditions tere farcel thea
tee ussetly meat, Th ray ve coted Must i read tle q.en*ionaatre 2 © 2
.

't mee trie that he

wat be laa ts sey “attentions Com, y reqeertgs onae

tiaer to be ae rye 2.
Led ass becaine be vee non

Fo vetng nie Fach the portiva (ec abereaty &


--- Page 289 ---
give edditionel Into and correc’ ‘pone of tne sivea answers.

&. At the end of the meet S stated thet he did not have “hie cer :

thie evening beceuse Josephine needee +4, F told him that he waa wiiliag | |

_ to pay hin a taxi, but be was not eble to give hin a ride. fF is quite
sure that.tne car Thich S uses te fos cepbines and that it Le oa St :

: dispoesl only vhen she doeo not needéd, Turther, if ever wanted to = 7
identify F's cer “it is extrecely doubtful that he sould neilventured | :
24%0 setting excuses in an evening with cuch loucy weather as it was)

. dast night. ;
9. . Byproduct of the talk about the car res that we learned
Josephine a,c: ete is 49, Ac ording to € nobogy vould tellieve hat she

was wore then 40. 4

PRernald

NPM $y.

Peet ee ta!

|
|

|
:
|

-
|

‘.

|


--- Page 290 ---
14-0000

Qvr

ATE AOKKENT
August 6, 1969

Subjeot: Jimmy SABORT (P-13830). Report on Hie

Mect with LOGINOV (Pell, 712) on Aug. ‘4 at Bamborne-fan Angel
~ at 2000 hre..

1. ‘fhe meot wae prearranged and 1t lasted 2 houre dnd-15 minutes.
Ao in’all previous cases 6 and L0G met in front of the restaurant. LOG
came 3 minutes esrlier, vane,
THZIR NEXT MEZT: On Aug 16 6 and Josephine | are. to ‘come to
~ QOuautla at the "fanoa" about 1000 hre to
be guests of LOG and his family (to celebrate
@ virthday which 18 on Aug 14 ).
On Aug 25 at Eamborne~San Angel at 2000 hrs a
Dusiness meet will be held.

2. LOG and & 2 Yodka cocktails, olub sandwitch and a beer. LOG
claimed that he had already eaten something and § felt a atomach dis~

‘eonfort.

3. - LOG aske€ 6 did he finish reading the book (1n English) about

-Rasputin which he gave him about a month ago. € answered effirmatively
andthey spoke ebout the book. LOG promtssd to give § another book, witten —

aa British , titled "USSR 1941-45" or similar. LOG wante 8 to be
familiar with the suffering of Bov people during the 3V II.°

4. fhen, LOG asked § whet was the situation with the US Enbaesy

-.Phone Direetory. 8 atated that the fictitious girl Patricia showed up

for few day and returned to the Staten for family rensone. He brought
up in & conv with-her the Dircotory and ehe told him that it wae tightly
controled, § left 1% at that point and he told LOG that he would have

so atart working on tho patter from ‘sarnatah if LOG wented the Directory

but 8 would appreciate LOGy ourreations as to how to gO about tt. 100

told B to forget 1% becsuce he knew shat the dircotory wae well controled.

5. fhe newt quoetion by LOS wae what progress did § eake with
Br. GANG. 8 tal4 bie about his seet aith PanG on Aug 1 (See PEKHALDS
TADONE Gonteaes bapert dated aug 2,'°69), LOG Listened 80 the etory
Bithout taterruptiag asd then he told & that ne ese nat certain that



--- Page 291 ---
$7-00000

a0

ay

-~2-
TANG was & member of the Chinese Emb staff here, decauee he did not find
hie name in the diplomatic liet. Further, he told § that he was doing a

good job, which he appreciated, but he must be very cautious because ‘the

Chinese. are elever people and extremely suspicious. . ;
6. “Ta reply to S'question L0G stated that°for anyone of them (Sov

Emb offioial)would meet with TANG, because that it too dangerous..§ que-
ried what wae dangerous about it and LOG etated that there. wae always

@ chance that they (TANG and LOG or another Sov) might be seen together

and that would be very bad. 5 went on to tell S that it would be his

Job to develop friendly relations with TANG ot possibly another Chinese

- offieial and slowly obtain from him the info LOG and hig emba ssy needed;

LOG will guide him ae to how to go about it and if they ‘show confidence ©
in & hoe will have it made and Sove. (L0G used the expression: WE ) would
pay him very well for that job. £ commented that he had believed that

. what he wae doing he dia out of personal friendehip with L0G and not

for money. LOG emiled at §' statement and ‘added that in addition to meney
they (Sova) enable & to travel to £ov Union and have a vacation on thé

Black Sea. ,
Te Whilé § wae thinking wheth

i

Oo say something or keep quiet, LOG

‘told him that the next. time he went to TANG he should Limit hie conv

‘to the publishing of ‘the article about Mat Ohina and if needed % deny
‘that he hed any contaet with his Sov friend (10G) eines he met PANG, 8!
job te to win. TANGS confidence and that ia a slow process with the
Ohiness, Then, in anewer to LOGB question § atated that there were to
Mexicana ( @ wonan and a man ) working at the Chinese Emb,. L0G told him
to got their nemea and addreases. commented that thie wae not aa simple

_ 80 1 sounded, because one cannot just.ack 8 pereon what waa hig nase

and eddrees. LOG commented that even this wae a matter which cannot be
Tushed: ftret get their nomes and later obtain the addrosa: .

8. There wos another thing & should doi find out how pany Ohineze
live in Nexioo Oity and detersined whichonee were the influentialone and
asose the lattorones deteraine which Gro the soet influential; he con
etart vorking om thio by dropping in a better Chinese reetaurant and
trying to develop ecso Doquaintancoss it oan be asoumed that thooe who
ge to reetaurente are People who have money and thoce who have soney are


--- Page 292 ---
Ti te nn ce

i. aay

Be. | : -3-

ueuallu lafluential. & agreed with LOG and oxpested LOG to tell him thet
he would pay for the vie!ting of Ohinese- reetaurante, but LOG kept
quiet. ; .

9. . 5 had'no. intention to skip. the talk about money and he told hin .
that the publiehing of the article about Kat China may end in a blind alley
if TANG does not supply. at least a half a page of advertising. LOG aid

not want that to happen and he told & that he (LOC) would give him
“ MN 1,000.= if the printing of the articlé should be held because of lack

of advertising. 5 brought to LOGs attention that half of pase of advertisl
brings to Pierre (RUDIAN) 1,500.— pesos. LOG felt that he would pay that.
money @8 a price of keeping the door open to the Ohinese Emb for §. To
put some coating on the pill §-added that he would try to obtain an adit
or two fron. Ohinese restaurants, but he daoubted ‘that the owners would

be. interested in advertising in a magazine which is far from being well

‘known. Juet the idea that § conteplated going to Ohinese restaurants

|
pleased 106s ear. |
10. L0G was interested in the status of the Presidential race and . |
§ told him that it narrowed down to four candédates and that all the
indications were in the direction that ECHZVARRIA was to be the officiel
PRI candidate. 3 believed that by Aug 20 he would know the neme of the
candidate. In reply to LOG's question § stated that the candidate will

"be publically known Sept. 15-20.

ll. . LOG wanted to give more time to be positive of the name of the
Presidential candidate and he decided that their next (business) meet would.
de on Aug 25 st the same rise and place. 10S immediately added that he

- did not forget that 9 birthday was on Aug 15 and that he believed that

it would be the best if they colebrated together in QGuautla on Baa Aug 16. |
LOG addad- that on that day hie wife and: son would be with him in Guautla |
and 8 should bring along Josephine; Log will bring a bottle of "Russien® |
champaign and pieenic style food; there will be bottle of Vodka: for |
t
[
!
t

- Jisephine and a bottileot ( P does not remember what ) for 8 plue the

book te previously sentioned. LOG added sone more deseription about

what a wonderful dey they would have togather. They are to meet in
Cusutla about, 1000 bre at the “Bsnoe®. LOG will be thera without fail
hecnuse he will piek up hie eon who is now attending she “Russian Sehool®



--- Page 293 ---
14-0000

. :
neal ent eer anes reenter i pe Sere me Sie setcag i in iA

r

-4-

in Quernavaea; the son speaks only Russian and English and L0G is. looking

forward to the facet thet hie con will be obliged to speak english all -

. day; LOGs wife speaks ‘a little Spanieh and there will be no problem for

her and Josephine, to. underetand each other. S promieed to be tere,
12. Leet moment assicnnent for S: LOG hold an info that. TANG speakea-

‘Ruesien. If § succeeds to verify thie fact L0G would like to know where

did TANG learn Russian.

BRFernald



--- Page 294 ---
14000000 . ee ne |

x4 %

. oo. . . rs
. SECRET Section Chief: _C/SB :
: ; cos : _
pcos 2
. . c/ic :
¥ : ysis ASST. : -
a . . : ROYWAKS/EIKxs, SB/SEC_P-2712
2 : , ts ~~ P-7442
_ d+ Agent/subject: L1cozy-5 ae DATE:4 Aug 69° Gam
. 2 Case Officer Vincent P. RIZZUTO ce, _ P2270 .

3. pate aud efte co contact: 4 Aug ée at kestaurant Parque

4. Date and site of next neeting: Subject will call--see below: — +

‘5. Administrative (salaries, accountings, etc.) ;

wo, : "Subject mentioned near, the close of the meeting ‘that he wed me

~ $600 (US) for the TV set Which COIGNE had obtained for him, ‘I said
that I thought this was a gift but Subject said.no, he insisted on
paying for it and would do so shortly, Meanwhile, a part has burned ©
out and he can not obtain a replacement in Mexico because this TO
particular model is not made in Mexico, He will call in with the

details and I will try to get it for him,

wf

6. . Information/: Instructions passed agent:

. None

Bee teen

qT " Report/Information received from agent: (use back if necessary) ©
Subject sac been in Eurore and Israel icr several weeks siace |

3 - our last meeting. Nothing of particular. interest developed on this

Sy. tedp.

Before he left,: “Subject was invited by NECHIPGRENKU (p-7442) to so :
celebrate the latter’ 's birthday (which happeas to be 4 Jury). Subject
tried-to beg orf but NECHIPCRENKO refused to take no for an answer —
and actuaily came to Subject's apartment with KOS TIKOV to bring i
Subject to NECHIPORENKO’s apartment, Since NECHIPORSNKN's wile was
away, three giris from the ,Pianitsky Chorus were awaixing che itarse a
men, Consigerable drinking was done and Subject said it was obvious a . . e
why they had asked him since the third girl needed a partner, Her namo - . : _
was Nina BUCHARGVA. Subject said that all of the girls were quite
attractive and “available for anything." Subject said that he under- ._
stood that most of the girls in the Chorus fit this category and ‘that
they would simply wait until their housemother was asleep before
going out and getting some action, : H

Se eee aemmmmeye qeninterniner: teenage

1

el yeee ag ae

. Subject and NECHIPORINKO actually have a good personal relntionstip.
8 Security: , (see attached sheet)»

None . . page, 2

9. Hiaceltanexst:
Subject solved a mystery Of vhere OLSTETNER waa during his recent

visit, Subject had net GESTNTNEN at the atrnort and bad sines ang
dived his faniiy during eoat of the Cine that GESTLTIER vad here. Xo
wonder GEATETNLR had 60 tine for Linep TY-5 oF anybody elae, - | _



--- Page 295 ---
14-0000

Pan

~2-

#7 continued :
th Ject believes. that NECHIPORENKO is very intelligent. He speaks
e best Spanish of any of ‘the Soviets known to Subject and due to
this facility 83. well “as his looks, can pass for a Mexican, Subject
believes that NccHIPORENKO was given the task of cultivating and
attemptirg to re-recruite hin after LOGINOV failed. Subject had
, Sone interesting comments about LOGINOV (P-11,712) which seem to
wee . dive with ether comments which have been made about him, LOGINOV
™ ~ had apparently originally beea given the task of re-recruiting
Subject.- When -he failed, he felt rebuffed nnd has since been very
cool towards Subject, Subject believes that LOGINOV either has or:
. thinks he has-been given bad marks by his superiors for having
failed with Subject, =LOGINOV is probably jealous or NECHIPORENKO who
_ has at least managed to retain Subject's friendship, Subject says :
.-__that"LOGINOV is not dumb and. that he uses his g00d looks to great — :
Advantage particularly with women, Oo . .

Subject has recently had some dealings with IVANOV. (P-1612) who a
is furious for the following reason: Formerly Soviets leaving Mexico . \
“Would take KLM or Sabena to Europe where they would pick up Aeroflot :
the following day. KLM and Sabena would pay overnight hotel costs,
’ Now, however, the Soviets are picking up Aeroflot in New York,
Because of Scheduling, however, they still must spend at least one
night in New York. The airlines will not pay this and IVANOV wanted
Subject to cover it. Subject refused. for the very sound reason that
Ait did not make sénse for hin to pay $20 for selling a $127 ticket
| from which his’ profit was only $9, IVANOV became furious and Subject
‘ ¥lelded by agreeing to pay for -IVANOV's accommodations and he said he
would do it for those becoming as friendly, such as NECHIPORENKO, but
he would not do it asa general rule, While Subject was away, .
however, his wife went overboard aud got IVANOV four rooms~(for two
people). Now Subject is furious, : .

_ On 31 July Subject’ was visited by PRIKHODXO (P-2270) who came .
in carrying a. copy of Pravda or Izvestiya, Subject quoted the old oe . ‘e
saw, _ "There is no truth in.Pravda and.no news in Izvestiyz," and - _
PRIKHODKO got mad claiming Subject was acting very unfriendly by
making anti-Soviet Propaganda, PRIKHODKO was very serious. This is
Probably as good and as accurate a thvmbnail sketch on PRIKHODKO that
we are “likely to get.” PRIKHODKO, ‘who Said that he was leaving in
. Septepber, had visited Subject to find out what Subject knew about
. 5 "a congress of Jewish intellectuals which is. to be held in mid-September
_in Bogota to disctss the Jewish problem in the Soviet Union. PRIKHODKO ~
wanted to know whe was going from Mexico. Subject told PRIKHODKO that
he had not heard 3f{ the congress but would check into it. He di¢ check
with someonw ai thé Israeliac Enbassy tre was hor:ified to learn :
that word had gotten our since at this time knowledge of the congress
is confidential. Subject told me that he would tell PRIXHODKO that
be had been unable to learn anything, reasoning that to te]} him about
at would get him invoivec with further requirements and would te working .
against the best ‘nterests of the Jews, I told Subject that I .

agreed corpletely,

Subject said that the Sputnik group which was due in June never
did get Mexican visas aad their triphos been cancelled, On the other
hand, a delegation of about a dozen Soviets is due in Augus! for a
Congress of eye, ear, nose, and throat Spectalistrx, and still another
group of a dozen. is due in September for a congress of soll mechanics,
Since these are official delegates as opposed to tho Sputaik group who
were tourists, they will have no troublo getting Mexican visas,

: Subject himself will be going to Budapost from 1 to 7 Novenbor
for tho TICA congress, Subject is world chatruan of thiga group which
apparently ig the International Convention Organization, :

Subject has received several letters from the Sputnik translator
ae weet on his recent trip to tne Soviet Unatoa, She bad received the
dictionary that he had sent jer from Rose ant the art books ho had
Beat Rep froa Mextco but notha pate Of glagaea he had went ber vy KLM,
Subject Gill look date this, Ne 16. obviously quile fond of this
girl oad appeared to be aeoking wy Feadcuraace that sho was aat a
KGN provocation, PT repeated that ft had aatd befpre shich la that
the possibility @he ds ofeatd be eons ide red but that uaseor tae



--- Page 296 ---
400000

- T . Auguet 2, 1969
Contact! Report

Subjects. Jimmy SABORI . (P<15,830)
Tate of Meet: August 1 at Restaurant Di Le Olub and Bonaperte Bar

: : from 2000 to 2540 bre:
le: The meet wae prearranged and $ came on time. The main purpose
of ithe seet waa to have fill the PAQ on LOGINOV (P=21,712), which wae
acoomplished to a eatiefactory degree, 1.6. 26 pages out of 53. Purther,
FERNALD wented to chéok what S has done or prepared for hie next meet

with LOG which i# écheduled for Sonday jug 4 at 2000 hre ( thie will be.
‘covered in the following paras),

Next Beets Puesday August 5 at the Restaurant-Bar Gontinetel
t 2000 hra,

2. oa Priday Aug 1 at 1400 hre S celled on OKINSUSI“N TANG, Minieter
Oounseleb of the Nat Chinese Emb at his office, The purpose of the

- call was to explain that ‘the magazine La Mision goes to press the latest

on the 16th of the month and it wae too late to have anything published
on Nat. China. In aovordanoe with the instruction § received from Pierre
RUDIAN, 8 told TANG that in publishing. euch articles the magazine writes
then acgording to the wishes of the embassy. of the. country about whieh
they are written. Because embassies pay only the subseription, they
usual gee to 1% that at least a halt of page of advertieing ie ine
cluded in the sane issue. f

Se “ANG Oxpreased underotanding tor such a practice and stated that:
he wae interested in hev Pht SRSBtic1e on the Republic of Ohina and —
probably one on ChianeXay-Shek and that he would ree to it that a propor
amount of ada be purchased. .

‘he TANG went on to ask which eabsariesa are subroribers of the

magagine and which use it for publishing erticles. 5 etated that preotioal-|
ly all embassies are subsoribers and alaost all of them had their articlea |
published at one tiae or the other. TANG, ‘epparently, wae not estiafied |
with this anewer and he asked point fz blanc wae the Sev Embassy a sub=— |

|

ecriber. ;
Whan 8 anaweved affirantively, TANG npked 8 did he know anybody


--- Page 297 ---
14-0000

; gale

Le 2 -
i ‘ :
in.the Sov Emteesy, 8 atated tuat we was on friendly terme with an
j . offfeial of the Sov Embassy. ‘TANG eommented that thie wae. Uneual, “decauee
| Sove sake: frends with nobody. ‘8 stated again that he hed no other way
of calling hie relation with the.Sov official than &@ perronal frienéehip. | oy
: In reply to TANGY queation: § -etated. that he prefored not to mention the
nase of his Sov friend and. TANG asked what position did Be Sov friend
. | have. & replied that an fer as he knew the Sov official was quite nigh up.
a ; “(Wte). TANG continued hia questioning: what wae the nature of & relation=
}
|

ship with the Sov, waa it a bdsiness type relationabip; how often aad they
aee each other; where dad they meet. S stated that he never transacted |
any business with the Sov and they meet about twice a month for a dinner |
or lunch in varioua reateurante. & added that the Sov plays tennie every
week~end and that he (£) sometime goes to watoh him playing (Note: the
latter statement ie not true). TANG asked did § ‘play tennis and he an-
swered negatively. - . . . :
6. At thie point 8 asked wae he interested in’ meeting his Sov friend ot
and TANG stated that he waa. Then, 8 asked %ekd TANG whet should he say
to his Sov friend. TANG commented that this was a good question and he
told $ that he would think about it, Consequently, he asked 8 could he
pases by on Nonday or Tuesday (Aug 4 or 5 ) and 8 said he would.
Te ' Tu reply to Fe Question 8 stated that he intended to tell L0G
exactly what tranpired on hie meet with TANG and that he planned
visiting TAN on. Monagay so that he would be able to tell LOG did CAND
decide to meet LOG. : :
a. F told § that he was coing too far in pleasing LOG and. was
getting in a deeper and deeper meses by retting involved with the Nat
Ohineses it was obvious from the attitued of Mr, TANG that he read hia
througd and wae taking his time to find “could he benifit. eome thing out |
’ of the whole scheme. fherefore, S ahoald aleo take it easy end not
rush to see TANG on Monday. i.e. before seeing LOG; further, he should i
stick to hie previoue decision that it wae rather dangeroue to be- |
eeeting with Log often. , 7 ; |
9. 8 felt that LOG would presse for a moet wath § 88 soon as poenible |
once ha got fo know that fANG hed opened the poseiblity of wanting to
| meet with LOG. FP considered thia to be possible and ispredsed on 6 that

io

TT ence ee en a



--- Page 298 ---
14-0000

i
H
i

, cogree and find its natural ends we were and continue to be interested

"on hia own. F left it at that. - >

‘sterted walking. 5,ans obviourly feering thet the sect would &
“and he would’ go home without any acney, apaw complained that the place —

etall.

}
«$e . : tee i
|
{

it wae up to him to ; ;

10. At thir point 8 asked P would wo help Sim out if ke got in troubles!
on account of hie asscciation with LOG. F replied that he was trying to
{natruct bim how to keep out of. troubles and it appeared that S did not

care moh about what F was telling him. { reacted quite strongly to Fe
statement by saying that F waa wrong, or at least {neorrectly interpreted
S attitude: ae far ‘aa be ($) ia concerned te he ie willing to discontinue
meeting with L0G immediately, if we tell him to do eo. FP answered that

if we wanted him to drop LOG we would had told him to do it. Nevertheless,
8 as an American 4a certainly aware of the fact that ‘the US Service and,
consequently, the US eacurity As getting nothing out of © eollavoratton
with LOG; in view of the fact that-LOG will remain here only about 2 ndthe
more we felt it would be the beat to leave the metter take itsnorsiel

in peepingtfut of trouble, but to achieve this the most important thing

wae that he carry out our instruction ae he received ity we badly need —

that 9 fullheartedly comply with our inetruoctions if §' association

with the KGB (elie) continues after the departure of LOG wo would probably

be willing to continue our relationehir with 9 only if we were able to | :
|

is sineerety and complete complying with every instruction he

count on h
8 stated that it was olear to him thet he could

may. ‘Feceive from us.
not count om any help. fron us if he got himself in trouble by aoting

ne Ae the working part of the meet ended about 1040 bre 3 stated
that he wea broke and did not anticipate to be in a better finanoiel

- condition for two additional monthe. & turned thie theme one way end the

other until he came cut with the requort for about 50.- Dollare. F answered

that he would look into the satter-end we left the INY Le Club and
hk up

( the IMI) wae good for writing purposes. but the food was lousy (true)
and no‘érinks were served and that if he wae not broke he would hed
invited P toa vrandy. P reacted by offortng a brandy. Oree at the bar
§ sexed P could he give him some money thie evening. ? felt 1% would
if be otallod more and he gave 8 XESO0.= ond obtained

Berve no purporo
a rene aa eae the



--- Page 299 ---
14-0000

QD

anon 2 Ts . —
a, sule ps a Rar rn : ™~ ,
fy Aw Cc rica ;
ee PULNO © / Aucist 1, 1969,
A , fe : sO
Contact Report ; | °
Subject; Lrnyocye2 (24905) ' ‘

Pate of Mest Susy 70 at Seetauran* TSrence at 1630
\
° il. Preerrenced neet to hica i-1 ceme 10 min early. ‘are meet

lasted 2 houre and 30 ain. } .
Kext meet; Nednesday Aug 6 at the ceme place et 1530 bre...

- 2. °  . Lel cane to this meet ‘in muck better ehape than he wae ‘laet tine eo
in spite of the fect thet he complained of being tired. ‘fe wanted to
eat sonetihing, but he tal not feel kes heving a full meal. we had 4 drinks

au . ( Run anz czta).

3. L-l hended me a Heraonal ity sketch wich he prepared on BONIS oat,
‘ rhich Le not much by iteelf, ‘but it could be us cful for nersuir neg .
og ©aeseesueat of B, -1, i. : a . Wie:
Ca I quértioned ag much as I van able without tipping my hand, ar
7 -@sout his viett to the Cov Enb on duly 9 « Ide teated no indicetion wt ioe)
5 ‘deception ner “ithholding of info on hte efde, , ‘@. :
.. 5e 1. In the aourae of debriefing fel on bis reet vith Loc I mede oy : ;
7 ' conmenta and gave hin ntcesrary inetraction, which are covered in the ~ i
& follo-ing ,arae.  * ee . , :
6 he Lel mentioned Lccs ques stioning atout LivvaL-i te Inneciately

pointe. sut thet the whele th sing made no renee to hin after LOGs repeated
stavenente ot the lart meet that ue ware not intercsted in LIOsLel. T told :
L-l the* it made little rense to me, except, if LCG weated to aecertain ...
“was Lel selling him the truth. Ten I acded that Zo wiehed LloaLel had

made some statezent rich L-l could felay to Lit to cee whet vould ng:

hie raretion, 2-1 cotuented that once in the past he told £05 ‘hat . i
Iieisiel told him that te used ta know a Sov Giploset here whoa he cous
sidered ‘ty be ile friend ani vee ilcappointed thea the Sor filplozat tried |
to reoriit hic, beeruse i$ wae obviore thet the frinadship rae a pretence.
“es 2°07 usetd thie he laighed and eeid thot this rac cue oF. sue old
aiuasy methods eaten rre no lonser Bred. (07: I did aot k >

‘ rath ay
itt a ee “theo Mage F855

wt?

- q . ~
UF i re enn Coons . an eee end



--- Page 300 ---
the roet important is that he does nothing without eheckin Porith aa,
f Ss c

-2-

tale fact and would appreciate shother itis centained ta the files)

7 “ith regard to Victor I. FANCE P. (er R) there to little to
be cad which rne wot centioned in the Attec: ant $1, Sle calling

Card iad the follorine phones printed: SiaTJeits 46-15-78 and oa the

Pach wae writeen 52-09-95, I en not inclined to take at the face value
LOG staterent that he knew ncthing about RANcS, esyectaily, in view
of tre fact that RANE ousht to be attencine the IIcR: for forme time to -

be able to npeak some Fuesian snd preunced teil. lel te willing to ,

make the trenelation SAUOS vante i? he ‘finde no diffteulty in hendling

‘the terminolocy.
8. a LOGk reaction on WUZOZ" plen to chow the Sov film at the.
CP cénter at Yervaillee eppearn to be interesting.

“bel wae acain puzzled with LOG's hinte that L-1 stould do comething ‘

coe

for the foclaliet cause eenuinely ciclikes the: idea cf getting involvee

in the £33 work. T told him that I aleo did not want nim to wet Invuived
in spying for EGR but 1 did not want him to ve cast acide by fov ufticialss | N
there 7i1l be things I-1 can do to stow the good will end wat he dees :

of the Sov fiknm:

dru awount to nothing ae ta the care vith the chowine

10. Ac-ording to el, LCt never before revesled hie political | . i :
he did in hin staterente ceneemning the
esd other Socialist countrier, - i

way of thinking ar mich an
exceesive freedom in the USER
ll. Ta antver to ny question IL-l pteted thet he broucht up the
Questic: vs not being iavited by LCG: to his apt, beceure on tae previoue
weet.z aexed hin vhether he wap ever in LCS couse. Taig correct and
I eckeé 3-1 thir question having in micd the filling cat of tae FAQ.

1 ie
Tt saz id Lele arenda under Auc 8 LOGY address Flur 1900 rre, 7 told
that if be io received ty Lice ar a friend that it sill he cececsar; .tiat

at hie plece. ie a matter of fact

he (Z-1) give @ ferez8ll dinser for or
befcre breaking up the evening L-1 ehould ark 197 ent his wile which

tete in Sept they vould be eble ts core to Lets houres he Till add thet ;

he vould spprectate 12 LOS bro ont along, one or two £ov ecupler., Tf Lec '
peke who elea vould be there {<1 will etate ke 2t4 ASe pan havirs wngone

eize, bot tf Lot wienen eo he ree willing invite anyora LCG murgerte2,



--- Page 301 ---
1

Purpose of this suggestion from the point of our interest is quite ‘ob= -

vious, : : . Te
12, stert. filling out the ing
and ££ 10 pages vere completed. The rork was coing slower than I anticig-— ;
ated because it ic not only a natler of traielating tut alro explaining :
the quertiones. a ae oe
. BeFernald © 7 .
- 4
Se eee ey . ees nyee'p
. . uy
' . . oe , ;
. . : . oo
. . in



--- Page 302 ---
14-0000

sZOr

ATTAOWMENT # 1
July 51, 1969.

Subject: LIBAOONA2 (P4805) = LOGIXOY (eu, ne) weet. .
at * Sestaurant Fonda del Retiro on Juty’ 28 at + 2500 brs

1

i
|
|
{
|
i. 1. fhe meet wae prearranged and L~l waa ia front 'of the restaurant
' 4 min before L0G. The maet leeted about 90 minutes. :
| : THRIR WBXT MEET: Priday August 8 at LOGh Apt et Igoneto 3 Reteva
21/2 at 1900 hours. |
2. No cocktails were taken before the meal ‘and with the meal beer
wae drank. LOG lead off with questions eongerning Lele family, health,
{
|
i
i

work and entertainment. : |

s.. * Ammong queations concerning L-l's work there were also queations
concerning LIOVAL-1: was Le] giving him classes regularly; wae LIOVAG-1
asking L-l questions about the USSR or Sov offictele; did LIOVAL-1 make
any statemente which would ahow *how he breates politically"(eic). lel _
gave routine answer pointing out that LIOVALel doés not hesitate to epeak
about his family mattere and work, but he never seks questions of any ° . 1
kind; he takee hie languase classes regularly ¢ there were n0 statements
ooncerning political mattera,
4 I-l told 100 thet July 24 or $5 @ young man Victor 1 RAMOS
called on him in the evening at home and told him that he needed a trans
lation of about 20 pages of Russian text into to Spanieh ard that he |

' was sent by LOG and he asked tim wiio waa the pereon. L0G stated thet he
did not know. the person and since it was a patter of translation he (LOG)
sent hin to L~l hoping that he may earn some money by making the translation
Iml asxed LOG did he know that RANOS spoke come Rucedan which he learned
‘at the IIORM. LOG stated that he was not aware of that fect. Lel will
Bake the traslation if he can handle the terainoxoty dealing with aconomy..

5. Iel told LCG that ha spoke to 3, MUNOZ about the Sov film and
that MUHOZ wae pleased with the offer. Due to the fact that MUNOZ is
presently undergoing a treatzent he wae not able to sake arrangezenta
’ for showing of the film. In reply to LOG's question L-1 stated that
_BUNOZ wanted to show _ the fLis in the Communiet Party Centro (sie) at
YevessIIw ,



--- Page 303 ---
- talk with MUNOZ.

2 2e . : ATTAGHAENT 2 1

Verssillee, LOG exclaimed that for Heavens eake he did not anything like
that; he wanted this to be entirely on private and personal basie without
political elements involved; to show the film at VYereasilles. would be
atupid, it would just enable the imperialiste to blast in the. papers
that the Sova were gotting involved in internal political nsttera of
Mexicoy in view of the coming Presidential elections this could be ‘blown
up into a ecandel, L-l remarked that he saw no difference in showing the

fila in the oP0entro or in the. ‘Oentro Asturtano as LOG wanted originally.

LOG explsined at length the difference and I~1 promised to have another

6. | Iml told shat L0G: that datte recently he saw in ‘the prees sone~
thing written to the effect that there are presently in the USSR 4 types
of datention ( concentration ) camps and he wondered whether that was
an indication that the freedom in the USSR wae being trimmed again. LOG
atated that "this was pure imperialist propaganda". He went on tu pay -
that in the USSR the cafes are full of people and that one oan hear then

even oritieiging the government. He added that in his opinion there. ia

4
i

too such: ‘(demasiado mucho) freedon in the USER and other Socialiet countries

If Stalin was alive it could not happen that while the people in America
are openly protesting egainst the war in Vietnam and against imperialica

‘a Socialist country as Ozecho rizea its people in favor of American and

West Gernan enpirjalion. "Too much freedom in the USER resulte with still
more freedom in other Socialist countries; this is no longer freedom, it.
isa shameful detraial of Sooialisms I hope that it will oe realised soon
that Stalin wae ‘right®,. eaid LOG. ; .
Te . At thie point LOG worked in a hint to Iel that he should do -
sosething for the Socialist causes. I~l sounded his old tune saying that
he eaw nothing he could do end added that now when LX opened hin the
door to the American Intelligence Service through Viotor RAKOS (actually
working for fhe Zconomist Inteliigence Unit, S.A., Reforma. 116 - 801 B)

- he would find out vould they pay him well and if they would he would
' work for them, because anywey the Sove never gave hin any thing. When LOG
_ asked him what the hell he was speaking about, I~1 stated thet he wae

km joking and LOG eormented that L~1 hed never done anything to help

the Sov effort and consequently, they were not able to pay him anything.
atn and aAtad that he (T0061

~ FO ee AR Lae mn Ban den Anta

|
|
|
|
|


--- Page 304 ---
y

236 ATTACEMBYT 4 1

never invited his to his house, while at the tine he hed met BROVEIN
he wae invited to Bs house after they met tha second or third time.
LOG told lel he had no intention of keeping L-l away from his house, +

ited” him’ to know that efnce the time BROVEIN wae here certsin.

; shanged:. previously the Sov.Embassy was paying the rent sfor
the. ‘epte ef their woffictele and now ‘the officials have to pay the rent
from their salary. Oonrequently, LOG lives in a emall,modest apt and he -
does not feel that it is. adequate for receiving people. Lel commented -
that LOG statement made hin feel bad because he believed that they were”
friends and thst formalities were not acceesary among them. Loc counter=

: acted tras by saying that IL-l and his wife were invited to his apt on

> Wed July $0, but he did not want I<l to be. surprised to eee in what kind”.

: of apt a Sov Bipl officials wae living. I-l thanked for the invitation

and etated that it was impossible to him to come before 2050 hra on Ved

because he had late olasses. LOG felt that 2030 wae rather late and they
agreed that wa IL-l and hie wife would come to L0Ge for dinner on Priday |

—— - a ae

Aug 8. a

os _ ‘BaPernald

:
i
i
:

:

}

{

i


--- Page 305 ---
ae, 1 byt mo
Sth Yo Daly 24, 1968. ;

Contact Feport . . ae \

Subject: Jirny SABGRI  (?-13,679) . ° : \
Date of guly 22 at the Raffaello from 2600 +e 2225 roure, ;
: ; ; . Loe , . : .
a 1. This meet tee held in lieu ef the one scheduled for the previous ;
Fn : evering to which © did not come. In the course of the morning of duly 22 - \
E tried to reach S by phone at hip office but-he cid not come there. Ia |
the afternoon he pioned to our office and left the merece to cell kin 7
home, I celled ebout 1675 when I returned from anotier ops meet, txt 3 a
vee not in, Joreptine told me thot he rould te teck ia 30 ainutes. Vhen i
I celled a4 1799 urs Josephine told me teet $ called fron out and told ;
| her thet te wen goine to tie airport end thet T should eall ehous 1800 Arse |
- At 1515 bre e wid ensvered the phone and told that © wee out but vould ot
7 return home soon..At 1900 hre the miid geve me the sae eansver, At 1930 ,
{ 7 hrs Josepaine snsvered and pasecd tne phone to S. Te arranged this neet. :
. : ‘ poet
Next meet: August 1 @4 the Chez Le Club a4 2000 bre. ot :
2. $ did not go throuch uueh of troutle to explain the reason :
. i he did not cone to. the meet the previous day. Ne seid that ke did not :
i write in fle notebsol: the tice of tie aees and ha went to the Seffaelio ‘
| Y at 1490 hre just to see whether I wes there; in the evening he cen’ to :
| aovies with Jorephine "Necaure, anyway he vas not sure when we Tere capq :
if posed to meet. Bs listenn’ to hie explanation without connent. , :
| point ZT eskei & hen < he. 7 f
—
|
{
|
. . —~


--- Page 306 ---
d

:

00000

3S

~2-

that $ cet ~ith 102 on ron evening (Culy 21), {.e, at the tine S was
supposed to meet with se end he did act heve the cuts to tell me that-
be left me Saiting ant he went to meet vith LO, - .

aspects of that meet ere self explenatory. Nevertheless, there ara new
inter-sting fectom concerning £ future neete with LOC. It mey he: noted
thet S requested lees frequent meet on tasis of suggestion I nefe to

hie suring the vrief neet of July 1F, Another factor Le the rattling of

4. I went te the detrinfing of £ on bie meet rit Lot. Sort of the

dig moneys 5 ~, po pes

5. There are facts rh ich ere naive. end contreaietory 5 as for ae
LOG is concerned, L7G vill rork out a plan “to provide rgcyrity
to their personel meets oa one tand and on rhe invited £ to

Sd «id not appear a cerioxs operator if

come to the Prench Club..... Lo
he felt thet © wae able to lead TANS in convs about cilittery strength of

Red China. , : : - js
: Oo ; fal 2a
€. The previously ieraldeé friendenip tetreen Lot end S-tboils
amy attenat to @ehvie? € on tne activity

dora to a bugle. On the other hend:
of krpeir ves Just a little hetter then ‘nothing. (TLL prepare a separate

Atta cheat}.

Te | AS the attechs rent 2 1 showe I diecursed in datail the queetion *
- Of § phone eatle to i a duly 1c. :
5, 1 elso shored to £ 1G pares of the To snd he felt cenfident to

ve able to ensver thea and sinilaroney sin fact, the regteurant Zelfeallo

does nol lesd Lteel? te tle exaersire of tsiue any oritice

far tt

\

PUB rm 1d


--- Page 307 ---
14-0000

pe

Ce |
v voice, There vee no indication thet the male anevering the Fhone recuga:!

. ~~.
f

dlery ¢ (I-17,339)

; - .
Rey Th one call to bgt on duly 10.
le JS ateted without herit fetion thet he phoned to yt oa July 20, -
1.0, the day their rect took place. oe :
2. 58 believes that he nade hir firet phone coll (iit: the one.

“VOL) atout 1160 hire, te wea told to call in an kour. ’

4 recerded hy IIy

and he DID CALL more or lees an hour later, Then, he was told thet

tee etill busy and that he ehould call in 70 minutes. fF WALLUD AS

J Wis TOLD end etter quite bit of walting LOG came to the plone.
calls to the game phone muher. .

tv

fon sequentiy, J& nade 7

", Be 2211 THYLE calls phich g& uade vere enovered by the asne oale

df voice in any of hie tro back cal ile. :

a : Js recalls that when he nace bin eccond call ang steted thet —
1t was "VYladioir calling" the operator underatcod that "calling" was the
cecond nace and he asked &S shonto spell it, whiea required come explain-

ing. :
5. eS if positive that at no tineidur cing his 3 calle he mentioned :

any kind of second nece. |
Set of the operator.”

6. - English war sroren at the req

ad



--- Page 308 ---
i.
|

ne ee ec

tae ; ; ATTACHMENT # 2
ws July 24, 1969

Subject: Jimmy SABORI (P13, 830) Rapor} on
Keet with LOGINOV (11,712) on July 18 at SEPe-Paris

l The meet was prearranged and. it lasted about two hours. The pres
viously ‘used. procedure wae followed: S and LOG met in front of the re-
etaurant and they entered it together. ‘Ae usually, LOG was sharp in ap=

‘pearing a% on the spot.

(HZIR NEXT MEET: On Aug 4 at Samborns Taourgentee-Tasquens at

: 2000 hre.
2. Qouree of the Moot.

~ L0G aeked S why he did not come "to play tennis with bim” at

the French Olut on July 12. 8 explained that he was not. feeling veli

and thet he did not recover completely from the flu which he had all
week. 5 added that. only for the reason of keeping the word given to a
friend (106) he came to thie meet. Nice worde by LOG who econéluded that
he brought 8 2 bottles of Votka which. ean be used ae " a medicine” for
olde and similar disconforte. : .

3. As it eould be expected after: such an ‘opening of the neet L0G
wae interested wae 8 able to @ceomplish something for him. § told him that

‘he had done what he promised and gave LOG the written report which LOG
read. When he finished the reading LOG remarked that 8 did not eign the

report. When 8 eaid that he was willing to do it right there, LOO eaid
that it wae not neceseary and that he was only joking.

ae. . LOG spent coneiéerabdle amount of time in questioning 8 about

the reesons, consequences whick: the cancellation of PEMEX contraot(s)
with eome US ofl companies. At certain point the questions laoked ciarity
and 8 aaked LOG point blane what wee he driving at. LOO stated that 6
ehould reolize that. the WBSR 16 the second largest producer of o12 in

the world (ef0) and that he wae interested in finding out waa it possible
for the USER to step in where the Americane kicked out (aie). & told LOG
that it waa 44ffioult to go gore wrong than LOG wee in hie thinking,
dacaune if Moxicaae tsk 414 not want Asericang involved ta thetr ofl
tusinesos 1t gaa positively certain that they wanted no foreigner, ree=


--- Page 309 ---
14-0000

a

-26

garélesa of who thcy =ay be, vo have ony shing to do with vexican oil

induetry.

5. LOG commented that the ‘USSR wae very moh interested in ype

_ing strong econosic interchange, especially trade, with Mexioo an re .

not finding the right atmosptere ner proper respouse. in Mexico. We asked Sf
8 what, in his opinion,. sould or should be done to overcome this situation.

i
i
| S answered that ne belteved that the Bova ought, to change their mentality |
j
i
t
i
7
i

if they wented to trade with Nexico, nainly, in the field of trade they
should forget about Socialism and adapt the Capitalistio mentality: to
trade with Mexico 6@va would have to establish industrial plants here

and to do it Kexicene must have 51 per. cent ohare in each case, which po

meane the controling atodky in reality this does not mean that Mexicans . i]
would inveet 51 periéent of the VALU. oes eeee . : k
6. L0G went to the other item of the written report and he scked .

8 how he. went about in contacting Ohin-Usten TANG, counselor of the

Nat Chinese Bab. & told hin about posing a8 4 reporter for the magazine

. La fieion and going. there. on reccommendation of Pierre EUDIAN ( See :

. FERNALD previous ‘contsot report). § edded that in the Sept iseue of the
magazine there would be an article dealing with Hat China and the
Poiking = Moecow cofliet and if needed another arteiole on Ohing-Kai Shek
would be published. LOG told S that he was pleased with the spanner in
whioh: 8 handled the taek he gave him. LOG did not disoues the contents
of this part of 8 report and he questioned 5 sbout CRTANG: he wanted

i to know was & ia @ position to keep this ecquaintance alive and develop

i it in to a eort of friendly inforaal. relationehip; he (LOG) knew TANG from’
some formal diplomatio gatherings. and he liked the person. S believed that
he was able to keep alive the established acquaintance and wae not able
to guese as ‘to bew far he would be able to develop it. LOG suggested

: that 8 go not allow too moh time to pass until his next visit to TANG.
8 said that he eould call on TANG on Fri July 25 to explain hin that
he 41d not suceeed in gatting the article in the Aug iseue of the magasine
and will publich tt in Sept iseus; at the same time S will make it known
that ho wee interested in getting the matesial for an artiole on Ohiang-kad |
@heak which should keep the doors open for another ViBitese. § was in

bie elesent when he wae deceribing thie and LOC-was not finding enough .
word to praice § and et the ease tine to encourage his to all be eaa



--- Page 310 ---
— Tenens SRO

00000

. ao'

|

nar seaeeeeieeenmeet

-3e

to bring his relationship with TANG to a point that LOO could meet TAEZS
ina friendly unofficial manner. LOG concluded that for such @ job ha

_ was willing to pay 8 in terme of thourande of Dollara, After the dust

of verbage settied L0G.told 5 that he should try to feel out TANG wes

_ be willing to: speak about the military stregth of Red China. LOG ex-

plained to § that propently the Bove were completely in dark as to the

: military atrength and oparational organisation of the Red Ohinese army,
' . they have no way of acquiring the info because even if they had friende

in Red China none of them dared to maintain contaot with Sov officials

_ hor officials of other Socialist countries which ere known to be on the

Bov side; Nat Ohina has many spies in Red China and they are well infced

“on all aspects of developments in Red (Obinar it ie poseible that TANG

would be willing to sake arrangements: ‘with his government for exchange
of info, especially, military info between the USSR and the Ben, of Ohina
and this would be beneficiary to the USSR ana the UBA. LOG went on to
tell § that he should think in terme of using RUDIAN for getting to
meet TANG out of hie embasey: be that a party or whatever aight be 7
needed, the expenses will taken are of by L0G, because money is no:

‘problem.

7. Then, LOG stated thet 6 should arrange something to enable . 0g
to meet RUDIAN in a emall, family type, oirole. 8 was cought by surprise

“ and told LCG that he told him that he and RUDIAH were quite often seeing
_@ach other. LOC stated that he knew RUDIAN well and wae in say instances

with RUDIAN at ‘Yeceptione and otner formal social functions, but he never
had an oportunity to be with RUDIAN in friendly and unformal efroumstances.
8 commented that the only problem he found in trying to make such an.
arrangenent was in the faot that RUDIAN often, sometime even twice 4 a

‘week, dropa in to ees 8 at his (Josephine's) apt but he never announces

hia visite in advance’ more. than an hour or two before he comea. 7

8. L0G asked § what happened to the US Emb phone dirsotory; ‘aaa the
girl (friend of 8S) return. 8 anewored that he did not have the slightest
idea what was going on, "because in his condition (of health) he aaa: joven :
go to chock dia the girl return’, a

9. LOG was proposing that thoy neet ia tha course of the next weck
but 8 told hia that he fe1% that they were meeting too often and in view



--- Page 311 ---
|4-00000

3

|
t
: |
|
of hie etatus of a tourist it may be assumbed that the Gobernacion carry |
-. ont spot checks on hin; if he was to be seen by the Cebdernacion or Security
Le agente in company of LOG it ia prety certain that they would take hia |
——tn-and iaterrogate him; he thinks that this can be avoided if they do not j
| . ee each other so often. -
10. LOG agreed with sv “yeagoning and added that he himself realised
“that they were getting together too often and he aleo cannot be 100 per
sent sure that he is not tailed core-tine, Therefore, he will out a plan
- by which they Will be able to eee each other whenever it 1s needed and |
will limit their. regular peraonal seets to twice per month. He went on
to tell 8 that he would pick up an apropriate spot on which 5 will place |
i

i

“ @ chalk sign when he needs to-se LOG urgently; LOG will paes by the place
every morning and if he see the sign he will erase it which will assure
i $ that he und: retood his request and they would then meet the same evening
‘ at a place (restaurant) which they would select only for this purpose.

A £06 concluded by stating that thia was the general idea and that he would
work out the detaile which he will explain. to 8 on their next meet which
they would hold in two weeks, i.e. August 4. :

ll. S commented that.the plan looked good ana if LOG was sure that
-1t would work then there was no need for them to meet nore than one a
month. LOG stated that 2 meets per month were needed in spite of the
[facet that he was positive that his eysten wes dependable. .

|
|
12, 8 told LOG that he did not spend any of the MN 400.- he gave |
him for the purpose of establishing contact with on official of the |
Bat Ohinese Emb and. consequently wanted to return the money. LOG told
him to keep it for himself and that he would give him money, as much as
-needed, if he had an. oportunity to entertaia TANG.
“13. There was some pnconsequential talk and LOG told S to come
! to the Prenoh Oiub any Saturday and that he would teach him to play |
tennis. LOG explained that he wae going to the club every Saturday |
about 1000 bret 5 will be allowed to enter if he eays that LOG was |
waiting for tim. i

BuPerneld



--- Page 312 ---
14-0000

IM

duly 23, 1659,

duly-17 € proned te our office .

i next morning. after -nucerous
fruitless ttewpte F 2 finally reacted © et hir house et 1730. hre. § told
F that hee wag Tith e Chinete the previous dey and rould see ain again on

ternacen at 1490 rs. $ concluéed that on tne varie of bis. firet
ugtec with the Chinese he precared a resort for nis friend Cecixov)
WF on he vould see the’ sore avening et 2090 bre, F told € that he mould
Oy Wants to see what he rrote before he gives it to 205 cnd a meet was

a arrenged at the above indicsted lecation. —- - be Jag

F esked S$ how did he
“see him. § etsted thet Sorters he i eed to the
& fat Chiaa Lomb and caid thet £, 2@ collet rater in the La Mision. ou a
o like to visit the Zmb ané talk to a person who would be eble to give hia
- ' sece info for. an article he vas preparing for La Mision. On July 17 :
oa ~ _ about 1399 arse § rent to the Emb and efter saying tnat ne was coning from
7 Pherre Ana LSrs he was received by Tard, Seunselor ‘of the Emb, § stated .
that he was interested in preparing s2 article concerning Chino - Sov
ideological conflict, vaos territorial claims and repeated border cleshes
s would went heve sone views of Nat China covernzent on these probleae,

+

TAM. stated +h he , nor his sovernsent, ¢

hatveen Taikines
?

9 fous Shet 4 85 vere leritinat

Zicate that eos posi



--- Page 313 ---
y

_ previously to me to}
refered to him ae Eduardo, § claims thet ke knew of no Eduerdo CARRILLO ‘

in Zarlish. To keep the door open for e:

Seunt on inerican assistance to return to the mainland, Taro stated
+ . +
thet Nat China Goverarnent was avere of the fest that the USA cannot .
>
t

help then in that catter without eesting involved in var witn Ueo's
forces, thick Net China unders stenés and considers that euch e war would

serve no purpose. _

3. According to § after 10 ~ 15 min of talking Tals gave Ss sore

wee e :
material end told hin to returna.the next dey to pick up aécitional :
material which he- coulé nse for his article. Therefore, § vent te .

the Nat China mb on July If at if00 brs and got rome of their publications :
fonel visit § requested sone a
meterisl on Chien-xei Shek ani Tos told tim that it would take gone :
time to get. it. TANS cleo ast: La Mision nave connections vith ;
Sevs here and § stated they the Sove vere cubsersbere to the

5 +

mecezine, Reportedly, this visit insted about 29 minutes.
but gus! Moved

4 after reeding the paper ( rez 1 pden § S pkepared for Lod

BE asked § vas. the Juli sene person whem he mentioned

is source on tee Port of Spain mpet: Conference and;

nacre

FRONTS, aad if he hed stated that it wes Eduardo it must have deen a Slip
of tongue. 4s for dulian, he is a a Repartment unknorn which) Chief .

in 2OrB%. .
. . . H

5. In reply to 78 question © stated that the UE companies aflected

by the POTIE decision vere Continental OL1, Gulf Gas (or cil) and Yelly :

a

Cit from Yalifornia.



--- Page 314 ---
“was not hie intention to cut us short, but to the contrery, he wanted -

to'be of help to us, ? ¢ealely stated that 3 wae ettiL ‘edle tonto that

it ke timely-reporte equeintance with any other Sov official and followa
our tnetrestion for every: farther stup Ge wakee in relationship with
such an offictel. © said that we could ‘count on hig.

7. s stated as “ter sone thinking, that he hed connections tn practical- .
‘Ty. every branch of 4 exioen sovernnent,- but definitely hed none in :
the: Seguridad de= stodo. * commented thet thie rae understandable hecause |

the Security keeps itrelf seperated fron politicking which enables, tals
organization to-cerry ont it duties without interference of politiens.

F added that the < Security pecple BREe excellently trained end wene
anazinely e flictent in their work, Tt was evident thet Pe statements
left S worried. F too% advant ase of the silence and added as an after

thought that in ils opinion it would be sige 42 thinned. his ceete vith
LOG to 2, maximun 3, per month. . oo

a Fo chanced tis previously prea arraaced neet “with s from fat July ;
13 te ionday uly 21 at 2009 urs. & did not have hie noteboor with hin
end be aseured F that he vould not forget it. Tata meet lasted 30 min,

' BRYernald

| |

i

{ PS. & did not show up on July 21 neet. a
_ BH? -

- wee ee — i

‘
a a oo —— wc _ 5 * . . vee . . mo os -?
° . " . Lot 7
t , :
. . ” . . . ry .
‘ .


--- Page 315 ---
.

BAHIA O€ SANTA DAROARA 20-398 Cryer

Gas Naural de Mixicn, S. AL
} - : Pa Naan
TELCFONOS: 31-53-90 JI-33-93
Jiextco 17.0.8. ; CASLE GANAMEX
Valentin Lusutnov.  Jely.18, 1969! Ond Report
1 - .

PSTROLEOS 1 EXTCATOS

Platfeandco con el sailor Jullan Carrillo Flores, hornano dol Sec.
¢o Relactones Exteriorés, Lice Antonio Carrillo Flores, sobre la
cancalacién de toios los cantzatos de extranJeros qite efectuaban
eon Fetroloos “éxlcanos, fud por inlelativa col director actuale

Inse Reyes Jeroles y. no ce la presidencias

Desde luego, lleva la aprodacién cel sofior Presidente Diag Ordas
dé que ninguna sano extranjera tonsa naca que ver oon el potrol-
e63 de ln nacton. No fud iniclativa de la Frostdencia sino todo
86 preparo dontro do Petroleos ~exitcanos especltalnente £1 seiore
fleyes Joroles, Lto. Sergio cenhusog y el Lic. Carlos Zorrilla De
La Garza Evia, sub=ttroctor de Finanzas, Kl bite. Josus Reyos o-
Heroles y el Lic. Carlos Zorrilla Te La Garza son los prinoipale |
os rasponsobles y sa inclinaa mucho hsola la Wéxteantzrotén da =

‘todo on Petroleos Mexicandes

Erba jada dole Repiblica ée China

Hinlatro Plonipotenctario’ = Conséjero del Enba Jador,
Cainelston Tange .

Platiqua con el sr. Tang sobre el sroblera da Russo-Chino en le- |
frontera del rio Ussuri isla de Damansol llaaada en Chino Txenpad.

El ores quo Feo Tse-tuns en realidad necesita tanto una diversion
do sus problexag internos como consolidar el Ejeraito fojfo un en--
emizo para unir “puedvlo. Ya qua log Bstados Tnidos os un cuen=
to viejo y qué nO /amenazan sis fronterds, el ris lozico e¢ la Une.
ton Sovietica. 99 terrends que reclasa son realmente Chines pues
en el ald 1847 Zar Nisolis I lo-rd anexar.¢ Rusta la cuonta del =~
rio Amur y en.el aflo 1855 errancaron a China la margea norte cele

mis? ride “ao Tsostuns ya so 2.6 nas all’ de lo qie pensaha y ose

resa, ple

ra el ya no hay setorno. Si sar
Rofo asl'co-> La urniton cel aasie
adelanto + solo qua “al can 5
de San Petescu
ratoa ve la ch

a élla, que en si no vale la Penae

Le precuntea 2 que lado estan ellog en asta probleza y el ma respone-
dio," sl lato qua cfs nos coavenca™, Le dite que al late da vao-)
no tient ua alfato 7 con el Jarus volveren 2 Catnae Ellos tirne «
un cepartaranta estratejica que estulla coxa qilene y czando as ale
mejor tlomy> ce recresar 7 c92 quiene alg les convlens.


--- Page 316 ---
14-0000

- N

Log Terrenon quo Pide Yao Tro-tuns do Rusia

Nocolle vuraviev, en reprosentactén de Zar “foolke I -

1840-47 Anoxa heata ‘el rio Azur. . |

1863s anoxan la rargon norte dol rio.

( La superfiole de la cuanca ea de uno 400 mt) 1 kLMbnetros
ouadrades «) Inoluye el. puerte de Vladivostok, el mar do Japén :

y al oeste, ol proplo rfo Uaeurt.

+1864 5 enoxen 440 mil ki ldietros ouadrados de la China oco! dental.
: : : e .

1861, anoxan 70 mil k11$n otras euadredos del trato de, San Potesburso. .

, : 8 (Provincta China de Staitans),_

Pespues do la Prinera Guorra Luddial Rueta se echa sobre Longolia

y se posesiona do la parte de “anchurla. . :

1954 tao Tse-tung pide al goblerno Rugo, Nikita Kexéeko Kruschey

a que regresen los terrenoa que les prometio Leain regresar. |i .

- Rusin se niega § Ne aqui la furta de Hao Tae-tunze ; : ‘

} #



--- Page 317 ---
-D0000

TO
“4
, ae St caer - :
' WA ONCUMENT ExTRacT OT aa

OTHE ECLLOWENS TNFARMATION CONCERNEVG ‘THE SUBJECT OF THIS 201
DOSSTER HAS RFEN EXTRACTED FROM ANITHER OFFICIAL OD FIle. _
PERSONS PERFURMING NAME TRACES ARE CAUTIONED THAT THE NOCU= 9 © TT ae

MENT FROM WHICH THIS EXTRACT WAS PREOARED CUNTAINS ADMITIONAL TO TTT
INFORMATION PERTAINING TQ THE SUBJECT AND SHOULD AE REQUESTED - se
a FROM TOVFILES. Oo se ae

LOGTNOV, VALENTIN. . Se
(.201-0295412 7 750-610-001
OTe -922311"

30 SEP 76" ”

—. REPLACEO OLEG MARSTMOVICH NECHTPORENDO AT | -
——-. SOVLET EMRASSY, MEXICO CITY AUG 65 _

ve vey me SECRET. F2 IMPDET CL BY 0546979. ° a
i a 20 BBS172



--- Page 318 ---
3

Ce a so | .
\ 1

August 26, 1969.

Contact Report : _

Subject: Jicmy SABORI (P=13,220). uy

Date of Meet: August 26 at Chez Rene. at 1400 brs \

1. The meot was prearranged and S came on time, The meet lasted

*

two hours and 79 zinutes,

_ 7
VRY-S Viswls Sept 8 at the sbue place at 1400 hrs, —

Z. S apolegizeé for not. bringing the cops of the report he gave

to. ARDIEHARD: he did not think of 4t tnis Besning when hé left the heise.

I told S that the fect that BEDIEHARD would renain here at icnat
five ade ‘*.fonal month did not plesre me, becuase I was not able to lect
the +aings go the way they were going until now and be just en observer,
In-reply to my questions § stated he was ready and determined to anytoing
we tell him to do: he is willing to drop the ansociation with ABDIEHARD:. |
he is equally ready to do or tell ABLIVHARD anything we instruct bin

even if it was certain that AZDIZHARD would drop him; hé is willing to go -
through any do'ngs we consider necea gary, I believe S was tlucere in

his stetenente.

te I told S not to call 4 under any circunstances before their next
meet (Sept 10); keep.away fron tre Chinese End; if he sete the ad2 from
Iuau Reritay rant & can advise 3203 by phone; take proof cl the ar‘itcle

as was proaised but avoid any conv watsoever; if Josephine feels like
goiag to the French Glub on fat (Aug 30) S can go with her, but I ses

ne point in hin going alsng alone. $ stated tat he urderstood wuat he
‘ag told an* he sould not do a move vithout ehecking with ma.

5e S asked in a matter of f.ct tona that he would like to know
wher? &e ctoud with us; did we went him to carry out the work we request
for patriotic re.sonr; do we intend give arc o ealary or make a wortawhile
pvesent. T turd him that he cen rest sure that ~e ranlized that he was not
in & finanetal yvcition to bs able to work out of patriotic feelings, and
ronsequentis Rs could bo pric Sor tia work as much as it is worth to us.
3. Re nexs stvoldect: Accorlisy to the atatecent of Dr Enrique
BOLATOS Cacho, cousin of GDO with whom GDO playa domino every Tuesday”

Pll 12.


--- Page 319 ---
-2-

at Lo* Pinos, L.ECHEVARRIA is the man; the race narrowed to 2 persons,
¥ohevarria and Ortis Mena; Mena is out because of reasono of health. :
The statement was made Sunday to ING. ESPZgod end S gotit from BARRIOS . .
Gomez Monday afternoon. ( Note I phoned to S  Mondey morning and he di@ mo,

"have any newe on this topio.). oy

Berernald- : : ;

ten OR A I Det


--- Page 320 ---
14-0000

ATTACHMENT

: August: 26, 1969

Subject: Jimny SANORI (P=23,830) Report on Hioa Meet - ;
with AEDIBHARD (P11, 712) on Aug 25 at Samborne-San Angel at 2000

jhe sn | :
1. The meet was prearranged and. it laeted 90 minutes. Ro changes ia

the pattern of meeting and A came on time.

THEIR NEXT MEET; Sept 40 at the seme place at 2000 brs,
5 was invited to come on Sat at 1030 bre to.
the French Club with Josephine. S not sure he

; will go. . oceans .
2. A apologised for not going to Cuautla on Aug 16. Lots of nite 7
words about thinking atout Sand Josephine all day that rainy day.”

36 A had a ‘suprise for S: few days ago he received ordere to remin

in Mexico at least 5 months more (sic). When S aked was he not. pleased with
the order, A stated that he wae practically ‘packed up and he had made

plana regarding the places he wanted to visit and it was’ “pleasure ia
unpacking. and so ‘auch lese he liked the idea of cancelling his plans. ©

& aeked several questions about As wife and A was giving normal answers.
Ati no time did A belittle his wide and he stated that she was 40 years old.”

4... 8 handed to Aa written report on what he acsomplished with the
Ghinese. A thanked. for the same and told S$ to get the article published
by al1 the means; | ‘do all poseible to get the ad from the Iuau Restaurants
keep in touch. with WORG or TANG but make sure there ie a bona fide reason _
to go to see them, example, to tell them that the ad was obtained, show
then the script of the articlo before 1t 1s published and similer; be very
oereful because Chinese ere highly suspicioue people.

5. phen, A deked § why TANG was not listed in the Dip List. § stated
that it was evident from TANGs calling card that-he just recently arrived
hero. A accepted the explantion and told § thst YONG was listed in the
Dip List ee a counselor and thet he (A) hed confuned TANG vith WONG and
that it was WONG who spoke Ruesian. : -

6. At thie point A hended to § an envelope contains ng HN SO00.< -
and he told §& he wonted him to have that money for accidental axpensea

|
=|
|
!
H


--- Page 321 ---
*~

‘
ay
1

while cell seting info fur A. 3 pretended he was “hesitant to receive money ;
but did not “arag the: story long ( from fear that A aight change his nind de
Te After. the. rier “ceremony” about giving and accepting the money —

& asked S did ; 125 have eny news about - ‘the. US Embasay Phone Direotory. § remind.
A. that he told,at ‘their’ lest meet that he had no way of getting it. A asked ¢

8 did he iknow anybody wor) ing in the’ we ‘USI. When § answered that he did
not think so A told him there was a number of girla working for USIS, they =:

work on the 5rd floor (of the Emt building) and several of then live in
the Hotel Geneve; they oarry out some propaganda; A ie not eure"how far®
can one got with them ( in terns of having good time ), but there is no
problem of getting them ( although, the interet ie limited to one girl) to
go out for dianer and dencing. This is something 6 should lo Ok into.

- 8 conbented to the effect did A have an idea how much it tékerto take a

chick like those for an evening of good time; such a bill runs about

aN 700.= . A replied that money waa no problem; if S lines up somethiag

it 4s enough if he phones him a day earlier and he will bring him the
money. . .

8 At this point A geve S the following inetruction: If S ever
needs something from A, ae money, or be has something for A he- should -
call the Embd and state that he wants to Speak to Vladizix of the

“Consulate | and stress that it was Viadinir calling. If A is in his office

Sy

‘he will. take the phone and there will be "juat mugho gusts de _saludarle"

fron both sidean. If A is not there he(Sd is to request’to “givellthe message

thet Vladimir called. The call should be made in the morning if possible.

Regardlese, whether S gets to speak to A or not he is to go the sane
evening at 2000 bra to their meet place at Samborne-£ fan Angel.

9. § he would see what could: ba. done and aeked A wae it possible

. that he was not able to do anything about the platinun. A apologised

‘that, at skipped his memory to tell S that he spoke to their Commercial

Oounsslor Viktor IVANOV (full name mentioned by A) about the matter and

' that VI wanted first to know through which Swise bank would the transaction

be carried outs terms of the desl the buyera propose and be sdvised that
Sova were not interest in any deale which would be less than 1 million

US DoMlare. As soon as 8 submits the info, S and IVANOV will etart work-
ing on the desl; if IVANOV leaves before the desl ite closed it will not

|
|
i
|



--- Page 322 ---
2
f
J -3-

. affect the deal beaquse IVAHOY will be able ta back 1t 4a Moscow. 8
j, , Qommented that it sounded good and that toth of them will make a nice
" eum of maxx money. With a smile on his face A told. S that he did not
want. any money because he bad all the ) Boney he wanted. A commented thats

10. '*# ‘aekea” the regular question. as to ho will ‘be the “next
President of Mexico. 8 told him it will be Tuis RCHBVARSIA, but this. is

i
i
{
|
i
\
still not positive. A did not ask for the source of info.
il. ~ 8 asked A ‘who: waa the girl. ‘in the restaurant te: waved to and:
, she wayed. back. 8 stated ial was the girl with whom he B quite regnisrly.
Played tonnie. a Voth
12. 5 wae not able to recall one more thang A asked him to do or

find info about. . .
13, The mest ended with a talk about pivtudeye. A bas his on Deo 25

and hie wife earlier, A made it known that hin wife would accept with
' pleaeure a birthday present as 9 bracelet. .

_ BHFernald ee



--- Page 323 ---
+ . i
. - - ‘ -
- \ . i
; : _ See mt Namba Ao meng ena come ae
~ . ’ t - 7 : : : :
- -n~ 7 aa ' . ran . ° : ! . : : ,
NN . , : : . .
‘oO. .
2 : : °
as - . 3 :
; . 3 a) 1 ¢ a
Ct. 8 n ft Le} -*
: ‘oA ng owt a 2,
oO ao a & @ De .
Q 2 Be ae eS! eg a .
uN vo wt 2 Goh . Pog
Y woh & © 5 BB o os 2B
oH a © - on OG
4G fod 8 uo wo cd pox
gi. 9S i aoe Ke a Go a
tf 2 - 2 8 ’ te .
. of Bom a ot 4 a
oS hort By wt oc ot
so 8 DS who soon no i
‘ in 9 . Go F 8 5 i
* x) iH go © By B “3
3 & : oo g 2 33 3 2
_ d 1 3 On Go BR ew Snot ai
: Ov oo oo -' Oo . par o
a 5 > on ? Ff gg 9 Pog "BR
. p Coo by te 2 ov os go" fe
: 8. G oO QQ 4 @ 2g,
a re * oa, 7 8 68 moe 3
‘ 9b et a 2 6 a 6
o poo on 2 g AR 8
g 3 o¢ oy Boe 8 a a
_— 4 Oo a ft 6! aoa
. : ws “oO us “too » J
8 aa 5 38 ae See ee |
; 8 . Boa: : SS
_ oo a DoS a PG et i :
a oo, 6-N aoe o 8 -
, w $ BS © a -
g EI Be 82 2 8 2 i
° : * a op 8 39 4 a
a 3 3 » : 49 how a {9
of ery soit ay g e
’ a. 3 98 f oo, ° 3 } me
a ba _& gt wood 8 oot ry eS
. & nee of da A B it EIS
my 3 dog op LG i 2
. « ‘aA soa ne 8 8 ew Yop Mt ‘
~ Po PP et O GG O 8 FH 4 ‘
D aS Qoob
2 a Poo 4 fo i] .
g@ 0) e.g P BoA H
: 33 a rr eG 8 « }
ro I wt Povey n oO aa ’ :
’ C vy b> oO. 2 a 3
. . BP SO 6 8 2D a
7 tt if @ vas) 3 is
wt ethos » og % ° , .
ot. P58 4
SN ra a Pow a] A
ray ad “uw ‘ ie .
oa oP st o u ,
i Pos 3 t “
s 8 3
; ao Q. 5 i
a a° i 3
° $8 a ad
» a 2 3
o o G ~
- Q re
. cot 4 u
7 & B 1 4 B
» a ‘a © vt “8 .
“
ww
, ~



--- Page 324 ---
14-0000

3a

: beldeve “that the yoy

wet ee ot
os reilding. Ne
ee eine
stcting

Emow LLRALAS.

Tle BEC.

vs it, boocusa he

id not Maot:?

ouvea wiom cise cid hy

heeeuse

that he

hig TEER

belatioush:

“



--- Page 325 ---
ee. “a om wee . 7 . ~ ~ ~~,
~ -i- —
\ o \ . .
he cones, inelfnad 2 80 cr
i dn the Tlelc co.
. hes ber ¢re oa :
: roan ;
. old son Sesgey,. thore.-
probloms in comcetion Ath ¢
_ oP opaLd:
Cee
. ‘4% for Source,
_ un 3 '
An ,
a oe i
ty . . i
‘ oe ‘
. , :
in to
. Y:
4 eon
:
j a
. S - .
” Sn
‘ e
+

oh


--- Page 326 ---
., SECKEY?-

es once or te tee & week te the Futurssa end Cine Hod

: ; they vent to the ear
being tho theaters, Bost frequently eitended, LOGINOV alwrys rade sone: .. ‘
sort of gonteet euring these outings, escording. to AENIPRIFF. She stated,
7 that he us: stelly leis his seat Btout 2309 hours and went. “out to the lobby
_ for sone tine. Sue did not know shore the contacts were setually muces n. ce
Once sho ‘ond LOGE encountered, “apparently aceident ally, outside the: nn
Cine Mod theater, a Noxicen Arzy Colonel, who wag introducéd to her by 7

LOCINOV as “Col. Sergio.” In this instance LOGINOy did not excuse hosélt

to > have 8 private eeaversation vith the ‘Nexteon,

Sergio" appeared to be about 25 years old end. wes iritréduced as his wite

(which AEMIDRISF doubted Pecguse, &s she put it, he didn't treat her 7

- one vould a wife, bat rather as a nistress). _ AESIDRIFF: Knew nothing sore |
a oa oe P|

about thic Nexican and never sew hia ssein, © ; S|
On another ‘ossasion, | Losriov and Abararry ees en Arericen in ! 7

: : - i

:

front of the Futurssa theater. LOGINOY introduced hia to hor cs "fol. ,

Michsel.” AEMIESITY ateted that he ves dressed in eivilien clothes. He

. : “9 SECRET



--- Page 327 ---
-2- . .

Pirsdinus beigut, no lessen, deeey 4 grey eyes

titught Me quite eters etive), LOSLioy tye "Meheel"” that he
“would esll Bin the Rest doy on urgent business. “dehack” wus clone.

‘G privels conversetioa.s She

‘esinated ‘this enecunter tesk plere ricut Septenter 1959. '

- + OBheuzey ~ RIFF stated tint COLCUZCT used her “in the
" seze cannér, J.e., tock hes chest 3. ths28 tn ell to Cine Chazultepse, then

left hey during the novie to eexe gone Bort of contact. -

ced 12-26

“Goneernine: “Souter Costecter in the iaxteen Police: ALALURIFR,
stated thet she. overly 2erd ooLtuscy tnd DICMIN talk ebout rony contects, which
they had in the police here. fue seid che had also overheard Vove:raxov,

<

TAKULIN, AND Cit, -AKHOV ‘talk ebsut how

y E002 police contacts the Soviets
have. Howsver, each specific exexple which AENIDUIF? could give concerned
* gone non-operationrl favor which the Sevlets could cet tats en care of, CBee
when the Soviets vented to set sezething through Aduanas when 2cte Soviet
_ was missing end ‘police ccoperatios wus needed; cotting edvence notice when
_ sone deconstretion hostile to the Soviets was about to take plece, etc.

She was not ebdle to recall ony tists thet Soviets had Qrerotional contasts

‘in the police; esents reporting oa whet the police vere doing: Bi essots who
assisted Soviets oper otionally in sou wey. However, aAnparrr thoucht

the Sovicts Protebly hrive such assets. , . Ss

Conesratns Sorte: eemsits in West Corson Poltea: AEUTDUIFP

L : | reealled that vhan she vent to Creasy &o interpreter for Soviet surgaon -

and textbook writer, Poste RASH, in Jemvory 1565 (shy went to Coloms

SECRET °

oe


--- Page 328 ---
a

SECRED | a _
<3- . .

Meet feratny on Cur,

asoider in -

“Yost Cur pteted that the rbeesy hed scene PS ido eon 5 vithtn the Vest
a . :

we.
Girsea police vho holpzd thew to wotect the Soviets (in context thet it

ANIUAIEY noted that AVASOY was quite old end very. spro=z reside. ,
Hiscellanseas onzctien sy notes - A®MPRIFF had no knowledge
of Soviet cafe hovees oy scfo Epartcants. She ststed that meny Soviet

viuitors stsyed st the Hostel Virrayes or in two other hotels near the

Soviet Embassy (che. couldn't remonber nexes). She did not znow whether the .

Soviets had eny sort oF spectad erage een or gontects in these hotels.
: AENIDRIEF stated that 5 she had attended several partios’ at

whic: Nextéens also vere present (she recalled specifically erties eb the

hones of KOLONYAKOY, PAULL t, GCGIUOY) end in cach instones the Soviet
officer, at send point during the evening, hed a Private conversation with

a Mexican guest. - (Unfortunetely, ARJIDRIFF wes unable: to recall the nexe

"of any of the Mexiecns she ret on these occasions, end of course there is

no way of knowing * hebher such private conversetions were oF rational.
neetings.) AEAIDALFF commented that at purcly Soviet parties, husbands aut
ways went off together end talked business, ond if wives approzehed, they
stopped thelr conversation. , ,

Debriefing conducted 1-§ June 1970:

KCRLUSEXIN - AEXIDRIFE commented thet sha thousht KORUSuKTH .-
wade oyeratiens] ceetinzgs in the Srecen Par, since she often sau hin

sitting in that ter, wearing dark glusses end trying to loos inconspicuous.

BECRET

Sroun theres seue Soviet offlesed ecutd te kidnapped ty the. eneays


--- Page 329 ---
i.
z
ye

4

pa

ed by this tir tnd vould Lok inst tee, eithoush she { :
a .
4

- an ee a : ee

Possible Fe: Contect - AUMTERTEF stated thet shy.

ves told ty Mniel Montiel (mated t : Z Montiel, 201-255951), the Soviets

* ehsuffeur, that ihe brovthor, vo is 2 Central Cozulttee number of the PEt

ca on the FCM publicsticn "La Voz de Kaxico," ves in ecntact

end vho wou

with KUPtess Cl In edaition, AEMIPAIZ?Y stated that she baileved that

Aricando VaRLIGD (iden with Arvendo Verdugo, 201-951726) had en -
uncle, leo nexsd Arzondo VEREUGO, who is First S2eretury of the FC end : n

who is in contest wlth KUPIAKOY. At leest thie wes strongly inferred bz

Montiel, according to AEMIDRIFF. (Editor note: Arnoldo NARTIUSZ Verdugo,
201-5254, who 1g brother of Armando, is Hirst Sceretary of PCH).
AEAILRIFY stated that KUPLYAXOY olways scened to. be very interested in and
: knovledgectle of whet appeared in "La Voz ¢2 Hoxfeo" end in the Pot publi-
cation “La Epoca." She stated thot, in geserel, KUSLYAXKCV paid so much . : : i
ettention to lozel politics andi seexed to .b2 so well inforcaed on FOE a
ratters that the felt certain he hed sozathing to do with the Pci
» AEMIDRIFF stated that KUPLYACCT's wife was a good friend of
. Salvedor GCUZALEZ uerin, head of the Toago é2 Cultura Poruler. GOUZEEEZ*
wife works in the Kuscua of “Anthrorolory. SUZALEZ sold a lot of Soviet . . :
books, according to ASMICRIFE, end for thet reason wes in contact with | :

XUFL: LCT, bat she cosrented that GOIZALEZ cay cleo have been utilized

rads

as 2

by KUPLYAHOY in sore other operational wey. Most of NUFLY: .XCV's. contests

seers to te Journalt: sts. (x ieee vere the soople ADVIDRITF env talking to hin

at receptions, ete.).
SECRET?



--- Page 330 ---
|

r4-D0000

3a

. a
- SHOR BM oe

“5+ a a
: ‘wife is the

ACMIURIEY etnted that Leopoldo AR

SIQUIENSS, is. nacbher Soviet essot

ciparrr seta thot

°
need VANOVSRIY talk ebaut this).

do JPAWO (econcsic consult ent for ‘iiners conts=

ain Sourersis LY ON ice). She also wsteted sho

knew that AROS went ob tins:

said that ASGTAL ce xT Fery year or SO. (2eAL identical

with Leerel

SECRET

so% who is hendled

nts to the Exbas sy to see KUPLYAXOV. AENIDRIFE



--- Page 331 ---
OS nee ae

YS Sb cette EN Beer

us _Pisordcrs of

LOSINGY “Ss often ‘guving this foried end told her Mt vas”

TY ables stated 4

to note,

Was 60:2 oF th Lost ¢ ors he hes ¢ + AFIUDRLFY ves certain ——

that these "contscts" involved in student’ plots, Atureatry releted thet
sonce at kato Cins, Login ae ® resting with a group of youths vho cere
in enother cer (Foleoa), thother tins, sece 2 or 3 Gays lates, LOSTNGY
hed Mizorotert glve hin. sone shotguns which MIa' POLENL had charge of.
LOSINGy pot the guns about 2ec0 ox 2300; the guns vere deturned the next
toming. Others who sccxed to te going out a) tha tine at night curing
the student riots (end talking about their eeetings iu genered the next”

morning j were EOLSHAKOY, XORMOUS:5OI, HIXIPOROy. SMUDRIFE nover heerd

nention of money being passed during this period (1.¢., to Soviet essets.

involved in riots} hor eny usnticn of suy Races or positions of ecsets
(This not in esroement with soze of Dan exes info). CENYXCV seered to te

involved also.

27 1970!  AEMIDRIFF was again

. 7
Debriefinc cond: ated 12-26 +

questioned on her knowledge of Scviet activities during the 1658 student

disorders. Sh? reported that ell she reelly knew was thet the Soviets were |

very busy curing this rertod; thst LOSINOY told her he ves going out every.
night to cske "contects:" that she overheard Soviet cesa officers telking
at various tires during this period to effect that they very busy, Prkigg.
uany contests; that the situation was potentially explosive end a dengerous

tina for thea to te uakine such ccateets. AETIQUFF teies vas with LOSIcy

SECRET

SLERIEF stunted that



--- Page 332 ---
oho been cates

Sete baeat en enn sec scien SORA CI ARUCMR EEF LESA DUARTE SE

.

. . oa
when ke rep uth gece "youths" dn private couversttiong,
. . . . -,

-in relation with the

velvensns of tnecs ¢ tg in the studen’ ergunizations, eny 22

ga. te the student noverens, finsncing of the “student rovenent
. oe . . 7

, Sovkes quican
; really deisn't tnor thet the Soviets had eny contacts

: with direc’ acegss to infornetion te these cctivities, bat she strongly
8ss) nos that they cid, based on thedy level of ectivity end the strong
tenor thet LOGINOY end other cuse officers seve ‘to the idea thes the contects
they vere aking vere dangerous ones for thea to be seen with during this
period. a : : :

Debricfing conducted 1-6 Tene 19793 REMEDIES qvesticned
re 1958 student disorders ecsin, for. clarification previowtly roported ;
details. She stated that the Soviets had soza different types of rifles
in tha Commercial Office which served as.sezples of guns. vhich they were
trying to sell conrereicdly in Mextca. Cne nisht about 11 ofeiock, during
the peried of sbudent riots, LOGINOV esx2 to the Comercial Office with -
MITOPOSSKY (AEMIDRIFF vas thzre wetching wv). Taey got "sone" rifles -
"peter could not see how ony or vhat. kind. Tey took. thea cut in son

-sort of begs. Tne next corning “sone” rifles wire returacd to the Coa-

.

mercial Office, but AFIEDRIFF doesn't know visether all of then vere
“brought back. She dezsn't know iuhether er not LOGIN eis) xt heve teen

duty officer for tha Exbassy for that night. :

AEMIDRIFF steted thot HECHIPCREINO's trip back to the USSR

during th: 193 ricts ray well have teen to rpfort on the riots. Eevever,

she dida't knov that this ves the case end noone speeifically told her so.

“SECRET


--- Page 333 ---
Fites: p-1i,042
p-15,623 .
P-13,223

€Q ce
. SUBJECT: -Conversntion with Ed ELLY wita USIS
: Sussect: Ce ith ga Us
a SDATE .: 3 December 1969 .

. 1. On 3 December. 1959 I had a brief conversation with Kd
. ~PoLLY to find out if he knew any of the- Soviets at the French”
boo, &. iClub,and to brief hin on these individuals, Ke did not know
: Seither CHERHYSIL (P-13,042) or SHEVCHINKO (P-15,623) by name" and
: 4. Shen r showed him pictwres, he said that he did not, recognize

o Witnem by sight either, Sinco he is.a relatively goods player and
a gy. |they are relatively poor, it is not likely that they would
Lt Xjplay. together, He said, however, that he would keep his cyes
Ni Yfopen for them and would try to identify sone of ‘the contacts

they appear to be making at the French Club.. Texplained to hia
jwho the two Soviets were and why wa were interested in them, and
he said that he wonld be only to happy to do what he could, .

_. +72, ¥ also asked him about Gloria PINTO (P-135,225) and showed
hin ‘a picture of her,-but while he thinks he may have seen her,
he does not ‘know her, Ne will check with his wife who may very
well. kuow her since she is a regular player and probably more or -
- less: the same league with Gloria, JI told sLLY that Gloria .
_ had béén. very close to LOGINOV (P-11,712) and that I was interested : '
_.to find out if she would now, since he bas departed, transfer her
attention to one of the other Soviets, (I was specifically . . 1
interested in finding out whether or not Gloria and CEERNYSH had’ .
met on the morning of 2¥ November as indicated by LIENVOY, but
_. ELLY had not been at the French Club that worning.) .

3. KELLY commented that he had found it herd to make contacts
at sports clubs in Mexico than in other countries, Mexicans were
particularly difficult to become friendly with and it was not at
all uncommon to have a tennis match with no personal contact
whatsoever. He said, however, that he thought the French Club
_was bettey than most in Mexico City, Even though the people
at the Frerch club were rather clanish, it was easier to get to
know them there than, for example, at Chapultepec.

: ear
mt ‘ . COARET



--- Page 334 ---
|
[

- day about anything, wtiy whether it be ‘American

friend

saxzita I asked if LOGINOV had ever made a pass ay her.

ask, an
; !

: lL hevenber 196%

susvicts
i:
'
|
|

He is

< Russian.

bei

PERFILT i :
Subject las also met LOGINOV, for vinon she did not have too,

;She didn't. think hin very smart, and he was
Sbaznexer

. 5
much xamak respect.

consta tly saying foolish things against the United States,
She said N05,

but then she never saw: hin when his wife was not elong. (Again,

she nab Come ‘up with | a@ pretty accurate thumbnail description).
%« to SARATOV, they Inv remained good friends
Gincdthe Olynpics, a a the friendship extends to SARATOV''s wif és.

§ be ject and Natasha ard very friendly, ‘and I would like fo keep it
I don't bhink there has bean any ‘Bex

6, Getging ba

thi way, for several reagons.
detweln Subje et and SARATO (although I could be \rong, and T will

In think get the tryth). Subject is well Qware of the

net ween SARATOV and Wife, and Mas a fatter of fact Natasha

friction.
poe

has said quite openly that she

j They nave an li-year-old sito whom she is “very

in about a

, vend to leave SSRAT

year.

is going to retur with hin. In effett, she has chosen he

ubject doo sx not knw vhther Natasha's

over her “husband.
son (she von't gdout in the evening

he is in bed,ete.) is.tkgresult of SARATOV rosying around, 0
but it is a act, and it drritakes the hell out of

cicse attachacat to her

—

vice- versa,
SARATOL «, On tho othor han

and af anything nore tierly
SARATOY nbraal. heeently ahe\efrered toa give Sul

Natasha As attraekive, intslligmet,

tracked ‘to tho Sovive Unton than

‘eet Rugslan

Segsonas, Phe Gab wot da che thoes ef fearon Vat

tha th ah eta Chest

42 dc thiag ab Vt hak pen prasse\ bee,


--- Page 335 ---
14-0000

- subtentially atfforent from the one S gave to PERNALD on Sept. 12, the
: date of their last personal meet. Inspite of the vaguenses concerning.
‘ the datea end absence of detaile, thie story appeare to be much closer

‘Date/Place of Meet; “Reptx Oct 7 at ches Rene Rest at et bre,

words with Josephine he told her that he was not able to keep ‘his ap-"

‘eopy of an “Agreement” concerning the Platinum deal. Ae it is evident

; on Sept, 25

epecee or (FAT SR )
ain Ma EER, Oerober 7, 1969

Contect Report
Subjeot:: Jimmy SABORI. (P-13,830). |

. The meet was arranged by-.phone “and B came abéut 14 min lete. |

NEXT MEET; Oct 10 (Fridey) Ineurgentes. Sug & Extremadura
at 1100 bre.

20000 According to S his leat meet with AEDIEHARD was on aug 25. ‘A had

arranged a meet with 8 for Sept 10, but A did not come to that meet. Two
éays-later,i.e. after he did not come to the saheduled meet A phoned to - -
St apt in the afternoon when he was not home snd after exchange of. nice

pointment with 8 two days ago and he wanted to apologize for not showing

"up and that he would ring up 8 in a déy or two, Because there were. no calle

from A for few days (sic), 8 decided to give hima ring snd sdvise hin
that he had something for him, namely, S had in his possession a duplicated

from the mentioned eopy of the Agreement the same was signed and the
Buyers Agent signature, was legalised y the U.S. Consul ia Mexico City

3. . Although, this story lacks soureoy in terms t of dates, it ia

to truth, than the vereion of Sept 32.
4. . 8 gave ma for copying a technical copy of the above mentioned .
Agreament concerning the Platinum transaction. As ie evident from the

wording of tho Agreement 8 would have nothing to do with Buyer or Buyers : ,

Agent. The Agreement places & on the Sellerw side or at the bent makes
ais siddle ean detween the actual Seller and Buyer's agent. P did not
read the Agreesent in the restaurant (during the meet) azd eade nO come
neate with regard to the Plotinua tranasotion ae euch.



--- Page 336 ---
_Andleating to 5 that he might. leave, S stated that this situation wee.
: giving: hig ean opportunity to find out for us who wae As replacement.
 F told him that it was-a common. knowledge as to who was Ab replacement

: and that. the only thing to aecertain positively wae whether A had dropped —

68 FP told 8 that he intended to discugs a serious matter with bin
_ but did not have all the facts on hand as yet. 7 added that he woulda have
‘all the facta the latest Thursday Oct 9 and be asked 6 to come on Priday

“would go to an adequate pleoe for such a convereation. & offered that - .-. :

a nr,
- a

-26

5s 5 asked ? should he ring up A from the restaurant to ask for a
maet with him. F told 6 that A had left or was about to take off the same
afternoon. Instead of commenting on the fast tha A left without even :

nis (8) or the developments prevented A fros seoting with 8.

6. Therefore, F suggested to S to phone to the ‘Sov Bub by veing :
the duplo, talk (code) whieh A gave him and see what happena. If ahother |
pérson tells him that A left Mexico, 8 shouldé sek how was he to go :
about a transaction he Antiated with A. If the anawering person instate:~
in knowing what wae it about, which 1e doubtful, 8 should limgt himself’
to the etatement that. it isa commercial matter involving large amount
of monoy, and it reached the etage that an action should be taken.

Te S promised to phone to the Sov Emb. on Oct 8 about 1000 hra and .
¥ told him that he would give hin s ring about 1500 tre.

Oct 10 to the place mentioned in para 2 above at 1100 hre and.that they

the conv could be hold in his: apt and P tolf that it would be’ sgainst our
practices. . : :

9. Ae far as. hts preeent: aotivity waa concerned, S eteted that

he wag doing a lote of running in connection with his attempt to sell

the unfinished hotel on the Caleta Beaoh in Acapulco.

BHPernald —


--- Page 337 ---
.. : . tte 8e Ne ee vepee .
~

Br erew ae see Nc.
TRY or.

: :
co ) AGREERXNEN
CNY oF SEXICO, D.F. ) - 7

As

. : . : THIS ACREINENT cade as of che date of
the sfenatures hereto, by and between the uacersigned SELLER'S AGENT, as : . \

agent for an undisclosed Forelgn Principal, hereinafter referred to as \

SELLER, and the undersigned BUYER'S AGENT, as ‘agent for another un

disclosed Foreign Principal, hereinafter referred to as BUYER;

ae a . . WHEREAS, Seller's Agent represents,:

@$ authorized agent, a Foreign Principal or entity, who are the ofners
ae ° ooo * . :
of certain anounts of Platinua and also represents that Seller's Agent,

° being an American citizen, has‘no rights, citle or interest, either ta

* legal or equitable in and to said Platinua, and is acting as Agent kN

.
7

‘solely for a connission; and

WHEREAS, Buyer's’ Ageat ‘represents

that’ his Principal desires to purchase Platinun from a Foretga Principal ne

or enticy, being a domestic Anmcrican company, has no rights, title or , : . ‘

interest, efther legal or equitable in and to said Platinua, and is

~ necting as Agent solely for a commission; ‘ : os -

a ey “ NOW, THEREFORE, in coasideration of
‘tha premises, covenants and conditions hereinafter contained, it is

mutually agreed by and between the Parties as follows:

‘«

|
I. a (a) ‘Seller's Agent agrees to sell and. Buyer's Agence agrees to
i * purchase approxinately One Hundred Thousand (103,000) troy
H .. gunces of Platinua cere or less in shipments of Twenty
- | cone ; Thousand (20,000) ounces monthly, priced on the basis of os st
. 1000 fineness, the same to be a transaction through a . ,
| . mutually acceptable bank in Zurich, Switzerland. :
| (®) Zn connection vith the said purchase cad sale, the following
procedure shall be followed:
i (1) Upon the éxecucion of this agreesent, the Buyer's Agent
i shall take inzediate Steps £9 cause to be issued to che : .
i Foreign Comnercial Sank, Bellairestrasse $2, Zurich, .
Switzerland, a divisible, transferrable, irrevocable,
i unconditional and without recourse, letter of credit
' Payable in U.S. currency, tn an amount sufficient co
‘ purchase che first shipmede of Teeaty Thousand (29,000)
troy ounces of Platinun issued by a bank acceptable to .
Seller's Agent. The said letter of credit shall be in oy
the fora set forth, attached hereto and nade a part :
. . hereof; a non-negotiable copy of the letter of credit .
60 posted shall be furnished to Seller's Agent to exanine.
(2) Ten (10) danking days herefron is Stanted to Suyer's Ageat ;
to deposit said letter of credic froa the drze of aceept= :
. . &@nce of this agrecsent and Stgnature thereof!


--- Page 338 ---
43),

(ec)

QO) Seller's 4

the docu:
twenty (20) “b

tur the poselr
letter of er fter shall con
@eliverfes until all of said Platinun has been dullvered,

“ * guch delivery of all of safd Platinum to be completed
within One Hundred Elgncy, (180) days after the posting

of the Jetcer of credit. -

¢4) For the payrent of such transaction, the Seller's Agent
shall enuse to be exhibited to the Buyer's Agent the *

. documentation to be dalivered to Buyer's Agent to effect
satd saic, to-wit: (a) Wareclouse receipe, (bd) Tactransic’
permit: and (c) Assay report; .

Therevgon, the Buyer's Agent shall Provice Seller's Ageat
with Satisfactory evideace of insurance by which the ”
Seller's Agent and his princtpals are protected agatact
all hazards from the loss of said Platinun during the tine
it 4s being assayed by Buyer's Agent's assayer (should
Buyer’s Agent desire an assay by his assayer) and extend.-
to the time of payment as herein provided, it being under *
stood that legal citle shall-not pass to Buyer's Ageat or
his principals uatil payment in full has been made fo

. Seller's Agent; Nee

* Payment shall -be tiade by the-said bank from the letter’ of:
eredit on deposit within five (5) banking days from the
‘date of delivery of the Platinum to the bank in Zurich, ~~
Switzerland, and payment .shall.be-made on-the -basis ‘of:
the accompanylag assay certificates; provided, however,
that within this five (5) banking day period Buyer's
Agent may have the Platinum dasayed by.a recognized
assayer of his own choosing, ‘in which event the Sellér's <
Agent shall have his representative of his choice'on hand
with the Buyer's assayer at the point of assay for. the:
purpose of observing the assaying of © any ‘wiaterLal which
is the subject of this agreesient. If the parties .hereto-
do not agree with the results of such assaying, then
_ each may select an umpire and these two shall.select-a
. third umpire and the conclusion of any two of these
the value of the;Blatinum referred ‘te of 025
ind the parties, Such umpire procedure
shall be completed and a report made‘ within the period .
mot to exceed five (5) additional banking days. If ~
‘this umpire procedure is used, and while it is being
used, payment shall first be made innedfately, on the
basis of Seller's Agent’s assay, as to the undisputed ~
‘amount, with the disputed amount to await payment until. . .
the. unipire’s report has been ‘made, whereupon payment shall - toonet
immediately be made on the umpire's report for the amount,
1€ any be determined due by unpire's report. Whea no assay
is réquested by Buyer's Agear, Payment shall be made
immediately on the basis of the assay certificates which
accompany the material. The-expense of Buyer's assay shall.
be to the Buyer, and the cost, if any, of the umpires shall-
be paid equally by Buyer's and Seller's Ageats.

(7) Buyer’s Agent shall assume the cost of packaging and freight
“Insurance, transfer to airport and all. responsibility. of

the Placinua once payment: has been conpleted co Seller's wee

Agent.- At this pofac, Seller's Agent shall be conpletely

free of any responsidilicy tn regard tv said Platinua.

Te ts apectfically understood that netther the Seller's Agent
nor the Buyer's Agent shall under ony coadition disclose to
anyone, except the. Seller's Agent's undisclosed principals and
the Buyer's Agent’ a undlacloced prinet pala respectively, the ..

mature of thts agreement.

&



--- Page 339 ---
4

hes any natienal or oy

sgulations of Sif

(2) THLs Acre
Jecal governsunt lays, ©
or the United States of

Performance under this Azre t shatl be excused for and so

loag as forces Hajeure, acts of Cod, strikes, war In chich

efther country fs involved, or any sinflar forac majeure cause 2 + w..
which say interfere with the performance beyond the control . we
of the parties hereto. +) ws. . : :

shall

Seller's Agent SuSl2 provide Fayed *s Agent 2 Narehoute recetpt
in in-transit. pernit, and an assay report with each shipment.

alt notices which cay be given under ‘ghis Agreement shall be

given fa writing by prepaid cable, airmail, or by personal . Oe . j
service to. Buyer's or to Sellez' s Agent at the address listed. --- - ‘y
below. . . sot ,

The price of said Platinua shall be. Mnety-ftve (395. 00) 1 U.S... Detlate
per troy ounce per 1000/zine.. . Boe, co.

Seller's Agent expressly agrees that if Buyer's Agent shall
have furntshed a letter of credic) as specified in sub-

paragraphs (1) and (2) of Secttoa b above, and Seller's.

“Agent shall fail to deliver all of said Platinum as provided ~
in sub-paragraph (3) of Section b above, and the documentation -
veferred to in paragraph (4) ef Section b above, then Buyer's”
Agent, at his option shall be entitled: to. cancel this contract
and neither party shall have any further obligation hereunder.

core Se Seller's Agent

BR
2 Upsecnmeeseen sees

“A ofthe United States ce Ament

ta mo porsgeslly kay
DaMo.waO te lepers elees

Dp. weateement : one
42.3 crue go ane uses and sures

ps 7 i
7 thercta ‘mmant fo Lh, .
Aa
- 4 {my hang end
, a th nace heraunts oot © :
My apare creatine ttt Baers 7
S$: Kr
> Y .
> Raney. “ocd ’
: Azorisan Consul _
2 ; 2
“ a ~ :
a . ;

. . * »
+ eet Sere ae Moe? AL UT ery?

‘ nn. tf


--- Page 340 ---
Leg, Tysern, MOV, WY
: - °§ Cetober, LS09

s -Buet CLEBACT 1

a PLACE2 -$ Get. 1100-129), JET Cafe.”

}
‘
Lh Subject arrived at tha Cafe five minutes late -(uiusval for hin)
fairly bubblin: over with "zood news". Subjecs had a little difficuly
getsingha to LOSINCV'S Exbassy ses-edida «+ 1620 hrs. ashe nad planed.
_T+ seems that the nmighboe with whon he h-d plaied to le .ve nis ehnild
was not at hone and so he hat to wait until his wite cane h &t about a
hrs. Sudt arrived at the inbassy at ebout 2020
ly greeted b> LOS. af only a feu words of greot:
fixed Subj a drink and a sandwich, an‘ LOZ excused hinself s.ying ne had to .
tale care-o? the may yeests and telling. Subj to = inself at home,
"you are more or less one of us." It should be noved tht LO3 did not.
introduce anyone to Subj. £o2isum1 Sudj soon appr d Yuri CAsSY34
and a rather lens, innocuous convesation ensued. $2 Pe Da Tt DUVSST
aprrocched Nie cuir and was introdiced to Subj by (Card
atticned.) Subj was very taken with DavfDu7s. I's Th ax sinplicity ani
learned ti:t the latier had at cne tire been a "locksmith," (2?) and ;
having studied at the "Iate national Dinlon:tic Institite"™ recived tais

appoinument as Private Sect to the anbassador.

2. Dering one of Sudj's free moments he app ed Pavel KOVALEY,. : an
whom he recognijed fron the ary Day oarty widens attended, out he could . ,
not recall ais. nine. KOVALZY said he thousht he reoorszed 5 Subj's face
but could not place it. Subj tnen :tolt hin that his mother taught Spanis’ “oy
. Embassy (actually Subj told me he is not sme she is still.doing so.)

kot ALEV said he was interested in forming a small group io stud, Sparts*
oro a. n.. and Rave Subj tesen it and. < latter heartily agrees to do $05 :.UVabi
we ° promised t. phona Subj at earliest opcortunity. Subj asxed KCVL EV
nh hoy the latter sould be adiressed, Loe., wiav vas is cosition at tne 1
abtaoie's : a8

Emb?)sOK replicd that he was more or less attached wo the tdlitary
five. : i
“y = : YK onAy erro pecdale oF ie .
3 4 met a younz led, ‘Yanya BT, and husbani naw unimoxun. They awe 7
a months, Very 14 tele, if ving else, vas said A we
v

is. Subj left th: mrt:

with the girly cigsiecll: .
a bear hug fron LOG ani was ese dito the door by _ ye? ie
‘awwing only had two drinis wille a> a v
H Ciil's bas s! $ out, so he went els re {no ident: Shes tion) wher
H he scent th: niche “talkin - . ;
ay DFO
vf tee Lee ae Fe DER wSC
: . . : flac * “h | & nn - . ,
a e nee

qe ose
he
ed



--- Page 341 ---
ace ne ey
ean Manctee sree er

EnHonor dot Cénsud
de la. Unisn @ oviétion

El séfor Valentin S: Loguinov, cénsul dela.
Union Sovietica en México, Yau distingeas esposa,

Picos de los dos Paises, complementados con el tra.
dicional vodka Musica popular causa amenizo ja vela-
da de ta Que se disfruté hasta las primeras horas del
dominga. - a
t: Mercedes Pinto, Gloria 2. de Pinto y Alejandra ae
Longuinay. :
.& Beawiz Bacon
3: Ralph Weigan. :
& Eh anfitrién de esa noche doctor Luis Gomez Co.
trea con el agasajado seacr Valentin S, Longinov
y don Tomas Lopez Sanchez.
$: Lourdés Aguilar, CONTENTISIMA, toda la no
the con ella’Manuel Hernandez.
4: FLASH... Virginia Fernandes de Aguilar y Ruth
B. de Wiegandt. .
1: Doctor José Mana Pinto y Adrian Aguilar.
8 {MIRADITAS de... Guillermo Marcos a Vicky
Aguilar, : . oo _



--- Page 342 ---
Brena

b
f
Z
£
i
:

_—

” he? . I told L-1 that AEDTENARD was scheduled to leeve in chow

- will esbkow. to LIBACCH-1 the Exceleicr of Sept 25 in vhich the &

that LIEACCH-1 would accomplieh anything,

Sis Sec ea fv Ds to
- pls fs. ah c

«fh lee gr ce

Ae fac on

Ceteler 4, 1665.

Conteet “eport GG hav ; _

fubjoets LIGYAL<) (P-€903)
Unte/Place of Heats Cet 3 st Rest. Hoyo of 1730 Hrs.

2. Frearrenged meet to which L-l caze 10 ains eorly.
; Next meet: October 16 et. the eane place at 1430 bre.

2. Since our last meet (Sept 19) L~l had not seen LIBACOX-2 who in
two instances: apologised ( 255 days after the clasn wad due ) fos not’.
holding the eats class "becnuee he was not feeling well". In dath cases
it was obvious to L-l that he was desd drunk when he F3 phoned. In view =:
of the fact that LIBACGN-1 a1 not Phone to L-1 for a whole seek, L-2
eave him a ring on Cet 2 ond he promised to cive a lesson to I-2-at 1630 tre
of Cot 3. a , : .
3. a L-l explained ne that his working schedule in the new scholar

year keepa him busy in the morning ang the afternoon, except, Friday

afternoons, which makes it difficult on him to be tyix tieing hinself

twice a week for LIPACCH-~Jy class which most of the time does not take
place. L-l felt that nothing would he lost if he reduced the Russian
language claseea to one per week, whieh would be nore than ha ever: -aetvelly
had in the past. I told him to go ahesd end suit himself. ; 4

end it would be. interesting to‘ aScertein whether” LIBACON=1 knew: i

Loy
farevel]” party was announced,L-1 felt bed ebout tho: fact that he xdid
not evea have & chance to see AEDIEHAND face to face. .
5. I-1 asked could he renird LIRACCH-1 that he promised te Snake’

whieh would enable i=l to meet Alls (Gizrov! 7S-13,442/).
0 do

Some osrrangements +
and suggest thet AEDIEHARDS deperture was opsning the pos ssibility
sone thing along that line. I toid IL-1 that there wae no resson to expect
tut IL-l should be efte> biz on!

the tasia of his former promise,

one

AYN2


--- Page 343 ---
i

a

~ 2 =

6. I told La? thet he chould tell LIBACCH-2 that a perron he knew
quite xhx2 well 3-4 years ego returned to the US Embuney and that this
arerican Exbarny official wes a very clone friend of a dear friend of

hie Ats2). 7 expleteed to L-1 that such neve would cortainly please
LYRACON-2 for ceverel obvios reasons, bus it van more important to ess

-eertsin rhether LIBACON=1 would relay such news to Gone of his Sov

. ecqusintances, If it happens that AuDIRE *HD'a replecenent or another Sov

-—_—offietal attempt to contect Le] through nena It vould be anisdication’
g

. Neat LIZACCH-1 got the news of L~ls US Embasay co edt liked the

idea and will Give the story to LIEACON-1.

Te ‘At this point it may be recelled that bel had net NCE STPORENKO
(P7442) at the time he had met YATSKCy,.
Be Connant by BHP: . ; ; .

In view of the fact that NECHIFORENKO by himself is-

--- a @etermined EG3 case officer who fe agressive in

' pursuing American targets, I felt that we stand to lesa
nothing by adding to L-1 a lebel of having a contact in
the US Enbossy.

° ; ; BlFernald


--- Page 344 ---
SECRET
| - DRAFT
\ . a
MEMORANDUM FOR: The Record
FROM, : C/CUB ;
SUBJ ECT : Visit to the Soviet Embassy, Night of

am 1 October 1969; Occasion: Despedida for
4 . Valentin LOGLNOV .

1. As members of the Cuerpo Consular, Terence ‘D. SISTONE

and his wife were formally invited to Valentin LOGINOV's —~

\despedida. The scheduled hours on the invitation were from
7:00 to 9:00, Actually, they arrived at about 7:45 and left

at about 9:15. SISTONE had two main purposes in attending the

_ Fecepticn: 1) to determine LOGINOV's replacenent, and 2) to

neet the Cubans present, if any. On ‘the ‘first count "SISTONE

was successful, Oleg Maksimovich NECHIPORENKO was formally
introduced. to the crowd as LOGINOV's replacement by Mr. KAZANTSEV,
the Soviet Chargé. On-the second count SISTONE was not
successful, ‘The only Cuban present that he recognized from,

mug photos was Rafael MIRABAL Fernandez, who quite obviously

avoided any contact with SISTONE, rather furtively Staying on

the other side ot the roon at all times. In° all, SISTONE

talked to some nine Soviet ‘Pabassy officials that he could
recognize from the mug book and had somewhat extensive con-
versation with three, LOGINOV; KAZANTSEV, the Chargé; and
Eduard Anatolyevich SARATOV, TASS representative. For cover

SECRET



--- Page 345 ---
SECRET
a
. . a
. Purposes SISTONE, of course, also had to spend much of his
time with fellow members of the Cuerpo Consular, mostly with
Leander VOURVOULIAS, the Cuerpo Consular president and ex-

Gréek Consul General, and Sra, arta FONSECA Guardia de

IN JIMENEZ, the Consul ‘from Costa Rica and Cuerpo Consular’ - 4)
UVyssccretary. SISTONE also met a Mexican engineer, Alfonso . ¢ wy
; “seme C., who is” married to a Greek woman who is Press and Y we

Att: < ‘SIBAJA is therefore active in, “ye .
te ikough ‘not a member of, the ‘Cuerpo Consular. It is very
x é a early to tell, of course, but a man like this could conceivably
Begs . become an access agent to either Soviet or Cuban officials,

ue 2. At the entranceway SISTONE met and recognized

Col. Konstantin Nikandrovich BOGATYREV, the Soviet Military

Both on this occasion and later in the evening ©

Attache.
He

BOGATYREV seemed to have a forced grin on his face.
exchanged pleasantries but provided nothing of significance.

3.. In the reception area inside, SISTONE greeted Yalentin

LOGINOV and his wife, who readily recalled SISTONE and wife

from the excursion to the Ford factory in July. LOGINOV also

recalled that SISTONE was Raymond A, FRADYER'S replacement

and asked after the latter: Had he yet arrived in Paris?

SISTONE said that he understood that FRADYER probably had
arrived by now. SISTONE asked LOGINOV when he was leaving

for the Soviet Union. LOGINOV answered that he was. leaving

. ; ‘SECRET



--- Page 346 ---
FPooo00

Seieetine ee

vneetn

. busied herself pointing out what. she thought to be the choicest

‘(See paragraph 9 below), SISTONE was told that LOGINOV would

SECRET = ~~ =
~3- :
on 7 October and that en route he was visiting New york City,
7 tho

@ place that he was anxious to visit. He added that_he would 3

“Mot .be visiting Paris to sce his friend FRADYER, LOGINOV all :

evening was a very amiable host, circulating and talking to . :
i
i

practically everyone presont.. About halt the tine he was

” surrounded by a circle of very young and apparently, unattached -

Mexican ladies - perhaps university students. Mrs. LOGINOV

i}
he . i
was quite transformed from the very drab woman of the Ford. a
, , }
i

excursion. She was quite dressed up, even attractive, and

did her best “to: be a charming hostess, although this was

obviously a forced chore for her. (Later in the evening she

items on the buffet table.) Valentin LOGINOV invited SISTONE

and his wife to visit him in Russia. -SISTONE answered to the
Letiney - :

effect that this would be wonderful ‘someday if he or the

i
H
3
'
i

Russian Government would pick up the tab. LOGINOV replied
that that was not necéssary because all Americans are so rich . '

they can afford a trip anywhere. Later, taiking. to SARATOV

be spending three days in New York City. Later inthe evening :

LOGINOV had his picture taken, probably by a press photographer, ."4 7
with SISTONE's wife, and he was in general quite gallant with te
; Ren i

her. In the little speech following the buffet, LOGINOV thanked *,

VOURVOULIAS for his few words of farewell and the Cuerpo

SECRET

_ PRS SEE eer


--- Page 347 ---
14-0000

SECRET
46

Consular gift of a sitver| plate. He ended his speech by

Saying, "Thanks on my wife's behalf and mine. You all have
been very attentive ito my great cormntry.” About the onky
times that LOGINOY seened teflective and serious dur ing the
evening wore during this Mttle speech and later in saying
“Bood- ‘by to SISTONE (accompanying this with an abrazo).

LOGI Nov" s last words to SISTONE were said with much real or

imagined feoling: | "You Americans and we Russians have to be

real frionds in these faye of the world.”

4. Negatively, SISTONE did not see LIREALM-1; SAO's
friend, Yuriy VANOVSKY;, or Chief,.S8's friend, Boris CHMYKHOV,
at the Soviet reception, Since there were over 100 people
milling about, SISTONE, of course, could have missed those
people.

5. Prior to the buffet, SISTONE met again Leon (Spanish
version of Lev) N, GOLOUZOV, a member of the Soviet Commercial

. Staff. SISTONE had met GOLOUZOV on the Ford excursion as

well, and the two chatted prey. about that trip. GOLOUZOV
gave SISTONE his calling card, Shion dis attached,

6. Standing beside GOLOUzOY, and obviously a very junior
officer under the latter's wing, was Vladimir PETROV, also of
the Soviet Commercial Office. Following the example oF big
brother, PETROV also gave SISTONE his calling card, ‘Tehten is
attached. PETROV looked to be no more than in his ‘tate 20's.

SECRET

e



--- Page 348 ---
s ECRET. an y
- oy 1 75- ,

Re is almost baby faced, has sort of a pug nese,. is perhaps
Ss’ 9” tall, is of medium to slin build, and has light hair,
PETROV said he. had only deen in Mexico two weeks and was
terribly confused by the vehicular traffic, which is much
noisier and extensive than that of Moscow. _ Although he
Speaks Spanish quite well, he said that- ‘this is his first ‘tour
in-Latin. America, .

Tee “Also early in-the evening SISTONE met Vladislav

“Sergeyevich KORNUSHKIN, Soviet Vice Consul. He is a fairly

_ ‘tall, ‘heavy built, athletic- ~tooking 5 young ‘man with a very-

‘strong’ ‘handgrip on being introduced. _ KORMUSHKIN was almost
,the only Russian with whom SISTONE talked who did- not even try
to be friendly. ke just stood around most of the evening,

listening and looking very i] at ease, - . eee

8. SISTONE only met Oleg Maksimovich NECHIPORENKO,

LOGINOV' s replacenent, very briefly and on an occasion when

: LOGINOV | was not around, Therefore, SISTONE was not formally

introduced by title or as FRADYER's. replacement to NECHIPORENKO.
This man looks very Latin and could mix in a crowd on the EF fi
street without any difsicutty. He ‘stayed very “much in the

background all evening. During the little ceremony in which
he was introducéd by the Chargé as LOGINOV’s replacement, he

“was asked when he had previously served ain Mexico by the latter.

pdeat reed 5 pres

He replied he had been in Mexico from 1960 (or. 1961) to 1985.

SECRET

th

poe



--- Page 349 ---
SECRET

. ‘ -6- ,
The Chargé deser ibed him as a young man advance ing rapidly in
the Sovict Foreign Service.*. He also said. he had been a om ps ‘e
Military: Attache before but is now a Second Secretary and
is taking over as Consul. The Chargé described NECHI PORENKO
as ‘a non-Great Russian, | SISTONE missed his nationality, if it a
was mentioned. | The Chargé. hastened to add- that NECHIPORENKO's
wife, however, is Great Russiaa, . rn _ oe ,

9. Possibly the longest conversation SISTONE had with

any Russian was that with Eduard Anatolyevich SARATOV, the, TASS |
representative. ISTONE was introduced to him by Findley

HOWARD, local Pan American representative. ” SARATOV ‘was the_ oe

only one with whom SISTONE spoke in English. All other con-
‘versation with Russians and other non-Americans was in Spanish.
SARATOV is a very smooth, gallant man-about-town. He seemed
to really enjoy talking to Americans and other non-Russians at
the reception, and bowed and established rapport with the ladies
of all ages. He said he has been in Mexico two years, is. ;
married,, and has one son in the fourth grade, who is naturally
attending the Embassy school and who will be sent next year
to the Soviet Union for his further education. He asked
_ SISTONE how many children he has and commented on the answer,
five, by saying that in his business it is not practical to
have many children, SISTONE asked him how he gets his news to
send home. SARATOV replied that he is obliged to send home.

.
2

SECRET


--- Page 350 ---
14-0000

Ht

“by Telex takes him about two or three hours. Fe said he is-

SECRET
-T-
daily a resume of the most important Mexican events, much of

which he obtains from ‘the Mexican press, He. added, with a

snile, that he, of course, has to supplement , “such newspaper

accounts with information from his own contacts. SISTONE
asked if this meant, among other things, getting handouts from
Government offices. SARATOV dismissed such sources as
unimportant. He said this daily resume which he sends home
the lone TASS representative here. He has his: own ‘office
separate from the Embassy arid prefers it that way. SARATOV

claimed to have traveled around Mexico quite a; pit. He seemed

- to be impressed ‘with the Yucatan and wanted to ‘know if SISTONE

has visited there. The latter replied that he hag not yet
visited the Yucatan since being stationed here, but that, as

a tourist, he had seen the ruins there some years ago. SARATOV
said that he is from Siberia, and in answer to a SISTONE ,
question said he thinks ‘tte Georgians are the warmest and
friendliest people of the Soviet Union. SARATOV obviously
likes to brag about having been stationed previously in
Washington. He also said he would very much like to have been
assigned to the new TASS office being opened in San Francisco.
According to SARATOV, per an agreement between the United States
and the U.S.S.R. the former will havé a Consulate in Leningrad
and the latter a Consulate in San Francisco, The opening of

SECRET



--- Page 351 ---
SECRET
-8-
the TASS office tn San Francisco is somehow connected with
the establishment of the Consulate. In speaking of LOGINOV's .

three days ‘tn New York, SARATOV said he would recomnend

. three things for him to visit: a good steak house, a good

Chinese restaurant, and Rockefeller Center Music Hall.
. ‘10, Somewhat after the despedida. ceremony; SISTONE noted
the Chargé, Boris Aleksandrovich KAZANTSEV, alone and ‘intro=

, duced himself. From a distance KAZANTSEY, looks. extremely _

young for his ‘high posi tion; ‘closer up he Tooks a little ‘older.

KAZANTSEV was extremely affable when he learned that SISTONE Ka)

was a new member of. the Cuerpo ‘Consular. He said he is a foe
. a

. member ‘of an equivalent organization among the diplomats and

in that context knows Mr. Wallace STUART quite wert.” Ke said
he was extremely privileged a couple of nights previously to

be able to shake Astronaut ARMSTRONG's hand and talk to him. |
He thinks the space program a wonderful adventure for both our

countries, and he mentioned the current negotiations between

the American Atomic Energy Commission and its Russian equivalent

in working out the rules for use of peaceful nuclear energy.

AT iby

While affable, KAZANTSEV doés not impart any feeling of .. ale

awn
sincerity whatsoever. He seems transparently cynical, and b : er
reminds one of a second-rate American politician. After the
above conversation and when SISTONE was talking to a Mexican

airport official, for some reason KAZANTSEV reapproached

SECRET

ae

a

1

4


--- Page 352 ---
“SISTONE and said to him and the

SECRET
19 .

Mexienn that he hoped there

would be a rapprochement soon between the United States and

Cuba.  SESTONE cannot figure out why KAZANTSEV made that

remark at that particular time unless 1) he thought the Mexican

airport. official was.a Cuban, or 2) he had been -briefed by

“LOGINOV: not only on the fact that SISTONE is FRADYER' 8 replace

nent, but that FRADYER had ‘somehow been connected. with Cubar

_ operations. *

\
mI lh. SISTONE only met Yuriy CHERNYSH, Soviet Vice Consul,

very briefly to shake hands near ‘the end of the evening. He

was easily recognizablo from his very light gray hadr. |

12, SISTONE was only sure of one Cuban" s being present,

, Rafael MIRABAL. At one time; SISTONE thought he saw a gentle-

man who looked a little like Ambassador Joaquin HERNANDEZ Armas,

but at second glance he did not think so. There was no doubt

in SISTONE’ s mind that MIRABAL was avoiding him. On one
occasion) MIRABAL was quite close, within earshot, and may well
have heard SISTONE either talking English to a fellow American
or his wife, or discussing something American. Thereafter,
every time SISTONE tried to work his way toward MIRABAL, | the

latter would shortly move further away. Twice SISTONE talked

to people that vaguely looked like they might be Cubans fron

the mug book, only to discover in both cases that they were

‘Mexican.

SECRET

°



--- Page 353 ---
‘:

e

SECRET ”
TOs
13. One of the above Mexicans turned out to be Alfonso

‘SIBAJA C., who described himself as a mechanical éngineer

and industrial consultant. His address is Ezequiel 82,

Mexico 14, D.F,, and his telephone number is 17-88- -85. This
es man‘is the husband of. a lady. ‘he described as Press and Cultural
“ext Attache of the: Greek Embassy. SISTOXNE was also introduced
- _ to her somewhat: later and got the impression that she is not
‘ “ creek but either all Mexican or perhaps of partial Greek

fervane Ty Belinvda We desibya oeey et
ancestry), SIBAJA and SISTONE exchanged calling cards ASTBAIA’ s!
is attached).. SIBAJA said that he and his wife attend such
functions as this reception quite frequently and definitely
. recalled not having met SISTONE before. The latter explained
his recent arrival, SIBAJA claimed that he isa good singer
of folklore songs and that his wife knows how to dance then.
They have performed spontaneously quite often at diplomatic
and consular affairs. Asked whether he would be going on the
“Cuerpo Consular exeursida Scheduled for late October, SIBAJA
said he would like to go. He is a working man, however, and
was not sure he could get away. SIBAJA and wife and STSTONE,
and wife established apport rather easily, and all agreed ig
they should meet again rather shortly. SIBAJA said that he | w
is of partial. French ancestry. He looks as though he might
be Mideastern, however. He is proud that he is from JUAREZ

home state of Oaxaca. It.would seem to SISTONE that this is

SECRET

.

v)

we


--- Page 354 ---
1400000

453

SECRET
. . --
the kind of man who might be used asa fairly nonsuspicious
access, agent to either the Soviets or the “Gubans. He obviously \
Cireuts ates in their ‘social milieu. SISTONE intends to follow & ‘t
Up on this man. He said he lives in Colonia Lindavista, where. bef
' SISTONE's wife’ s relatives are concentrated, He has ason . L :
7 going to Colegio Tepeyac in that area. 4 o
14, The only Americans SISTONE was aware of at the

“reception were’ 1) Clyde SNIDER, Chief of. the Visa Section of

a 7 ‘the Consulate, 2y ‘Findley HOWARD, of Pan American, and 3) David

WIESLEY, American businessman and Honorary Consul of Iceland.

15. Cousiderin the: fact that _SISTONE wwas only in the
. Soviet Embassy a little over one hour and had to spend a good
part of his time talking to SNIDER, ‘VOURVOULIAS, and that real
‘pain-in-the-neck, Sra. JIMENEZ, he considers his contact with |

Soviets about the maxinun that could be. achieved under the

"circumstances. oo, _ . Soa iE

Attachment:
Copy of calling cards (3)

Distribution:
Orig ~- SIBAJA (new P), w/att 7
1- P-11712 (LOGINOV), w/o att

TDS: lmp

SECRET


--- Page 355 ---
wee 4 ia Sih
ec po OF wane

+ de Le spor. : : : .

lhe ei 7 eaedceey whe jie 1 Cotober 1969

: is ¢ 75 Css a
Costace 8F OT

hiceor Si boll

PEC 1 Get. 1690 - 1739, EL: Yo: -tiro Hest. 2 Hotel Enperador.

Lh I arrived ten minutes prior to the an nohuted tire, notedzy Subject's
Car Serted aroun: the comer, entered the Sestauvant and fount Subj without
ditticulty rn J ¥;

Mithout any preléninaries io szes.. cf, Subj toli me thut he had

nz ness for Re. «s he hesi fora ont I, axsed hin if he

ited to the desredida tis svexn de was a bit shocked and
iisaptointed, bectiatx with & "tho, t", but recovered yuickly -
awl adiiste? that tiis uas to have heen interesting news - yes he hai
been invited and was going. He exclaine he had made a phone call to”

| the s>bassy to invite LOGINCY to his house for a farevell party, but the =

vr turned the tebles and invited Subj to the deszedida. Subj claimed .

is _tolt 103 that tis in reality a "dirty deal", but LOG countered ith
sauenta “in te return! urscnth; ani now he was toc bus;
Witiations. (Sudji did net appear to be unhapay with
Sebi promised to ke 3 eyas and ears open and +
et: cast LOZ ould introd:ce. hin $3 his replace vent, © une

itd ety - Kae heegeccnt eatla—— KBE Saree ow

svovd, of cour.e, too only a few ninutes, the rest of the tine
Subj iiseus-ed waren, foot, drin:

and related tonics. He would Uke, se

said, te be bot.er oc uainted w. alla 91 £20vrb (sorks at Sovenb). whon he
consijers to-be en exces :tional'y interest ting girl, altnoush ms.ried.. (I_
den't betieve he isa nositich to to nuda adeut tht I beliéve he ig
carabla of seducing a lot of girls, but I acn! t sec how he could work up
much access to this scman.)

he Subj gave a cory of & short caper Coritte nm iri Russian) pe woried
up en his friend REN.A253 ‘who Lives in 5-n Juen del 0, neur ,eretaro «
Sibje is very anxious t. Ss indivi al out I ft stad ‘don'® seo.

nave uB help

2SS Sis ono of Lhese ninsel ne a t
en of the “jooweat. is. aitee! A. <Fuiloe - ws: wat Ctre’

ply!

transla

‘Be Sudj is 2 wry} + friendly, likable cha-, but I do not tect thin. “i
he would Mind it aiftient to rabricste. sone ta ng, wether iv be incortunt
ir othe cus: Tus As: turely an orinion, so far, based -n nothing concrete.

rressed a desize to heve a "blags" with me sonetine wita
no reference: I said i soxld consi des Féraaos it ‘woutd. ba.
amusin 5.

ED

DF sects



--- Page 356 ---
1 October 1989 .

.

“Ben Os is tras asLatioa of” docu: ont urittea by: “LIBaC Si 1 re Bis friend : a

7

ankard born in the province of AsTU2za. During. th » Spanish Sivil .
ken to. tre USoR with other cullirea. Conpleted his elementary v
ciildrens* scheols. Entered Leningrai tniversity rajoring , :
3 3 ¢ t graduation was a given a chair in the same :
deartrent. arrived in xico, T bel’evo, in. “1987, - with tae aid of ais sister,.

who lives in San Juan tel Ros. Ig a minager of a restaurant. Henares is a
- very intelligent, sensitive, fellow. Always stuiied with pleas.re. cs very

font of nature ad animals. Duriny seriods of vacati ‘ron the elsn
iste<t of just fooling arothd as did “the ob. che woul
rd, water boy, in vines ards, took long walks, read, S) > ani

always tried .o be a loner. Therefore, se was not very well liked, was teased,
and onea, knowing, that he not ageol swimer, was tirewn fron a steep .
J+, bank inte tie river i ALY. y mother dr ad him out. He alxays loved hér, : vo

and to this jay has great affection for enever he Visits vexico he {
never fails to cali'on her. Feiny ac. juainted wh § character and seatingnts, :
I would “say toat now, living fn a dead city,, he suffers greatly. i
that because of nis loneliness he inoreg pated a stupid, old fashioned, : i
girls dig political views are the most lib-ral, ant ‘veing an intelligent: wt .

{

i

i

i

|

|

i

1
WS vho Lives in Sun duh del Mos BE “

fellow, he was never placed in an ungonfortable . posi sion, walt ous wh he was
"not fully trusted. . es :

oss “I ‘think, th 7 vere “at rossible, to use these charseteristies, we could
- use hin te our 27eat adventaze." : : cree
atseev ry until, ani reriads
c data re the above

; ai toli Subject that wa would make no move °
_ Rot even then, he provi ted: ne with personal bio 3ra
intividual.

Den

easiness ee et ann arta tet fabs ASSESSED EB BET, ete tare



--- Page 357 ---
14.9p000

; Habe Sin

; Seki

. os

Nee ey. *e Va
. wf va cea ad Yel -
. > a -
ten ate hee Ae lese "

-

rn :
pe OWNS phieet
fe ‘
eA pose L Las

«

Loe tyivet brits tae, oe
Oa a

j
{
|

go

oo = Along Z $ 5

ee prin, met setae a Bynent Khe Pie ¢ PUA
LE Meee gs
I, an: Le peti 4 spon oy “ae dye

. x ahs, hehe, .
fo ds LE‘, fs MGgpe fre eee ie
t ; _

fous J, “ y 2. 2,
‘- fre ae ec aaa nae d a a 4be Cea é € CON LLL ee
ig.
Put 12 é He, é Yee Onn . o
7 © Mee oe OPEL, Cd rare Ved tee.
a zy 2st resest b2rSpe 'e we t

He az.
_ _ ; oe
od ype hoe eee hecte atin Sverre Mae © resin. so
ee eee Pte. _—

fey a

wets . .
oltre ea ty: Z fitpt setied. Abt aegis og Lovie tee set a ee
7 rn L.. ot: 2
‘te Ah 4, ene oo LF SL. Td oe
Pe iwan _— Fe
UI, ML wishes nfo oA

ge Aan Cente d

Se, eee) Bhs,
Ay, at 2 tt Aye nad SMe Wot ed, ¢ tle ae
oS eee a
pr elt! x, ¢ 44. I t t« 2

i
fps Chora Co xlag

ioe

- FUL C4 Frege
a eo. “Poe cy aad Le P8é ne Warne

i Gfeiey. be, Lenucce cee la Siseyseg
co : :

be) a Le OLE ATG ok fe

1
a ae seed reeese rie whee “wT

SJ
Hees OR. 2e tad Wetoerd hee! gee BZ. Abas 2

Z, Z
fg Meente, ree Pad 6 PORE OL GEO ne cthyites ¢ ee.

i
1
:
i

bad epugthe |


--- Page 358 ---
eee .
e . .

 4e ; eaten ae vey ind .

Win Crtecget ROE CES: GROG :

—— . 7 :
on aes

4, 194, Lapres preletiecas Cele : :

oe - Hi

ae 8b CS ever cch seen’,

WAY aed etgee OMT A Lerby |

wet Gps, fer, Lityes veegl,
. . _—. i o= ,p bom, . *
wite deed, Hee Cet 4 PtPAG boa tue? ove Pee ee files reg,

!

|
i:
j

2 tan nese cement ee ne in i
cat ai aie

eon ina a mR A ht A oS RE AEN ARUN

r
}



--- Page 359 ---
14-0000

j
i
H
!
i
i
1
}
!
{
i
:

354

"Sisisivicstiae | Gntreh “S364

ge eig eaten can, 4180 pio.
- ACTION; Secstate WASHDC: ren

MEXICO 5366 a a

FOR FBI -.

VIBAS HORSE Valentin LOGUINOV C-3 December 23, 1927
Moscéw, employee of Boviat @abassy in Mexico. Arr.

Mew York October 7, 1969 via Air France Plt. 700.

' Dep. Hew York October 10 via Aexoflot. Accompanied

- by wife, Alexandra LOGUINOVA Auguat 20, 1928 Moseow,

; and son, Dimitri. LocuEsov born 1959.

. MCBRIDE. - -. ae
t a
eo
| onited by C/vIB CNSAider/mal
. 10/1/69
Sonagreace J

cnn AUR ES TF LED a fe —
eee ler icg- - .

‘Dete: 1 oct 1sé9, : °



--- Page 360 ---
Scns nent tnt meget cna aod SAFO colnet iamnow nnn See me NY LG RIESE AIT

shoe

ave

(paipiennteecyene meee
° rien

a Sama

er

Sash tye eee nn nme -

_ the fact that Cartillo Flores did not attend the interview of
2. By going to the General Assembly of” the United Nations, lic.

: Carrillo Flores, secretary of Foreign Relations is out of the

: presidential race by ‘constititional reasong.

at the Chilean embasay, where I met Kazantsev who invited me to

~ ambeasdor, the. Ghana ambassador, the Paraguyan chargé é'affairs,

a id S Meee

“ on. Liven]

Mexico

alking. to varioua people, ‘such as Guillermo Tardiff, no-

information has been circulated or has. circulated regarding:

Raul Roa, foreign minister of Cuba and president Diaz “rdaz.

According to. people. whodt may. be considered as knowing about -

politics Carrillo Flores never had a ‘chance to be nominated —
because. of his close associations with United States “ankers.

2. On the 18 of. September J went to. the ‘national day celebration .

go to their embassy on the: firet of October for a farewell party

fer Valentin ‘Longuinov, who is leaving soon. Th e new @ehecoslova-

quian anbassador was with Kazantsey. I arrived late and many.

people had ‘already ‘lett. ‘Wallace ‘Stuart. was. there, the ‘new Raw

an several other. -Aiplonata of minor importance. The Chilean

colony seens to ve quite large. . : oe oo.

fh Loapley |



--- Page 361 ---
” SUBJECT: LIBACON 1 ~

26 Bent mber 1969

CONTACT REPOXT

that evening be post oned. According to Subject LO0 told hin ta.t tieir
diner had been scheduled for the 18th, not the 15th, so Subj mmomd assumed
LOO was’ correct. I remained Subj tat to the beat of my recolle ction it —
had been for the 15th, In any event, Subj said LOO took the costponenant very
well, especially when Subj confirmed with LOG again that the latrer was not
leaving in October, perhaps not even in Novexber. Subj apologized to L0Q,
oxphaining that his wife had just taken on a new job, was nervous about it,
and in adiition, was taking care of her paremts dog an‘ birds, and was simply
not in condition to have o party. (I an not sure Subj vent throw; with this

explanation to L00 or to me only.) Subj plana to visit LOG 5% the Embassy

on tt 29th, 30th, or the first of Cctober, at which time he will set a
dato for the dinner, hopefuliy he sald, for the sine week, If the dinner is
tote held prior to hited: the evehing of tha first of Oct. Subj will call
the office, (aa in the past) and ao inform the party on tho other ends

Gur noxt meeting is scheduled or 1600 hours, 1 Oct., at ve "EL Yortiret (2)

Rest. axxamx in the Suites Emperador. .

2. Bubject4a wife, described as A ilingual*® secretary/tyrist 1a now
employed by Orbdita Su lementaY, and is 7d 3 3,50) monthly. Sujb, olains
that ah will be earning 3 000 by next month, if everftaing coca off walle
Qne of Uw parteers efxthx (7) of this sur; leamt is: andres Catuno, Michelena.

epuld : : :
. 3. Subj then asked mo if I/check a street map of Hoscow and seo if I
could find Uj, NESHDANOVA on it. I totd hia I could tut would not give hin -
an eng wor ompbr the other unless he would provide rp with a satisfactory
reas. After extraot'ng a promise from mo that I would not. Laugh at him, ho
“recseded to tall‘ma about a recent oxcertencs he hud with a medium at Andrea's
howe. He prefaced hia story with an assirsace that he is an atisigt and doss
not believe in th hereafter nor in apiritualien in particular, nevertheless,
he was shaken with the ex:erience. Hu clined that the rediua (nane unkmoun to
Subj.) did not go into a trancn, nor tum off any of the lights, but sim yy
ased Subj. if ha. had ev r know a girl by th nano of “Tanya® while Subd.
Lived in sm aml town Nour Ivanova (n.80 not far fra Moscow.) Subs oh ined

“that he recalled a girl by tiat fame, that bo an! she weru only avout 20 yrs

of ato at ty tim, ani trat tuey ured to ¢o mahrosa qatering togethor. 9
Ho patd e brove wut ina cold seent wren io cadius «od Bis qastion
tacaane ho waa absolutely roaitiva that no um@ in Aexiga would remmter Us
girl'a nam nor wee teode, iy mdiun inon oald, sraasins: Cor Tanya, Sdvrov_o
Rafiehks®, fit:bioy safset). Subs olaina t:.% the atlas hue no knovielio of —
Ve itgetan Jengiage ant Uist he had not been oallod wofiahaa® eine early
chilfuud, debs fhe rodiwa eml ined tat Taga Net died ais acntham anc aut
was nov resent 14 Us rosa, Thruar: Vo cediua, iss esplelned 1 8 Sraitan)-

Lut oe tat bewa AuPiod tle a Vilentin Mw 7, a living at a3} Ul, Bech ianetay


--- Page 362 ---
arte 23, Moxeows: Subj was-not eure he hai tie correct numrical adiress, nor
did ho know what resion of Moscow the street was in. Tanya furtoer exphained
that KIRASCV was engaged in somo unspee:fi ied undarground work, possibly.

uxth anti-government activity, and that one srbor of this grour was" agtually
onplayed by the . -KOB, He was not firth: r identified.

ce ‘guy then went on to relate two other & "odd" experiences: he > had had
rior: a coming to Mexico, Thay are not worth répaguting here.” 1 tola

bj I would. try to locate the. afore iteritioned street on the Moscew map: but
that I did not take any of this very sertously, Although Subj: realized that
I waa amused by this tale he was not sgemd angered ‘by my attitude . saving
he dtd not know vhat to make of it hinsslf. .

DFDOITYANSON



--- Page 363 ---
ERODUCT SALES REPCRT

) Ce <7. 2
1. sat ceman SSE DED —
; ee
i 2. Supervisor . John Peas
3. Date/meeting 27-18-59. 2600-0390 hours
00 hour

- Site Hoz2 of D>. Luis Gonzoz. Ielosias 221 - : .

4. Date/next mtg.> . . :
Site = : - : a

5. Administra tive :

a Nothing. : ae
t . y
| _ 7
| 6. Instructions to salesman : ; - oF .
i Nothing. So, Re
I, , 7. Report. by salesman _ : ~~ oo
I : R. Party. Tho. occzsicn tag a farewell party given by ou
: tennis group in the ho-s of Dr. Gores for DGHARD, who leaves 3 ;
Ostober 7th or Sth for Kosec:r. In addition to nyself and ry : : '
; : wife, thd follssing ware present; . fo
| lente : ate j :
i ee _ ; Gloria Pirto i ; . 3
fos: os me, : Pepe Pinto - . ut : . P :
: (4 las Gonez - By AAT maciece (i2yns) :
! an : Sylvia Gonez- ) v4 ~ OG _
i too, . Merecdes Pints (elderly writer, aunt of Popo, nother of ~~ 9 = 7
os cn a . . ° , Rubon, cother of Pitucka whois the wife of Harb j
i - . , . . . Wallacz) | . :
oo, . - Ruben Rojas. Fatchelor. tcfor in TV soap operas (novelas) i
“” : oO aml tho lecitizate thoater, : i
i ; Qe MER 1
i (oontiness
i . :

9. Supervisor's comments

Plosso instrast ne az %e whothed or not you want re to
attonl the rocactios Velox yy, asd $f's9, what to loot: fur
beallos avoting DIEEk 303 myylacanes$. Can you call off the
Fil? t .

al we eng chsh rbd
yen

pie



--- Page 364 ---
- - Siriem Agtiter
Virgen Aguilar
Tozzsito (lia)
Ralph. Wiesandt
; Ruth Wieganit -
tho party ws very gay, excellent food brought ‘by each of
the guest, much nusic, dancing, amd drinking. No politics.
Eyeryona ¥ss in.a very frlondly. nood. . a
7 2. Forssk foreoll-rocestion. Wednesday, October 1, at
: - 3900 hours 4% tho Sovies exbassy will bo the fornal party for
. DIEHARD,
: Tho Pintos, Gozez aml possibly others fron owe group will
attend.this party. I do not know how big it will bo. : :

: . nm . ON DIEYAND wes disappointed when I said I woald not attend, but
weet ew ‘ aN that this was no reflection on ny frientship for hin. I stated
- SL wd yo. ° that T folt 4% urrise for an Aterican to visit the Soviet en-
pt yO BA bassy. Iwas afraid that the F2T or CIA would learn of my visit.
NK -Wwe X¥ Val wasery insistent and said he'd ba disappointed if we did :
yy — not cone. Later in.the ovening he brousht up the subject again = ©
Pad and insisted thore would be no way anyon3 could know if I vero - ‘
prescat or note-there would ba no risk to x@-sno. nates would de. .
recorded. I said I wo.dd taink about it, but doubted that wo

»& r
oe o val : ould coze. :

\ , Ce. _ 3. DISHARD's rovlaconent. During the course of the evening,
Roan vad . _ spoecies were Rado, or at least scai-forsal coments and wishes
id . 21° Of goodluck to DISHARD and his wife. .DISUAND said that his ro-

‘ placoscat weld be at the farevoll perty at the eabassy_and be
A, hoped wamould Alt noch bin. Ralph Vicganit stated that ho |
Loon . wanted DIZHLO's repiacezent to know that he, the replacesent,
H ee ee ng te would be Wleote in our grou. Cur group is sonsvhat inter-
} oo : nbional and Hes givea us all a chance to exchange views. Yo |
Po : would rest losing ex:tact with the Soviets. DISHARD then
fo nentionod that his replaceaent is sorething of a sporstaan. -

; 4, Jurk Schornich, I told DISEARD that I hadn't seen Turi
vA for a lens tina. 1 asxed wit had hapooned to hin. Ho ansvered —
& that Yuri hdd beon on vacation for a wile. This coos not account

:

1 eo

poe ae ows wt for the rary nonths, perhaps five or six, that I have not soen
_ cfm H fu . _ Yurl, I did not press the issue. -

fs ated ae 5. BUEIR9 STINT. DISTARD sosced to be indifferent to
Ly 7F re Popo's pracenca. oa ho danced with Gloria ho often sacaed
b . vory intinato--dancir2 cleso, wiispors ani girém gizcles,

Souliud looks. Gloria did not try to control this situation,
but rather rerbiclmated, hy sfo later rorertod that vhilo
dancing. with DIKHLD he also tricd to flirt with ker, but on
a nore discrsto lovel, holding her toe clozo, squesting her

hant norninscully, ete. .

6. PRL ONES! comments. Wo arrived prosptly at 2009 hours.
Wo wero tho firsts carsts to ersive ant the ealy cuests for :
nearly an hour, Dering this tine Dr. Gonta nada sovoral consents
of inkorest. First, lot no aay that I have thowht that bite



--- Page 365 ---
wes a comuntst syapthyser, cespito his wealth. He tecano fanous
gor6 tine bad: by sucsossfey sewing bict: ona hand that wes:
arpatated in an accident. Ho is a doctor with Securo Socks. ~
Vexico sirce.has chon hia’ 6f to the uorld as Hexicots groat
hand-surccon. Ho travels, arowal the world abterding redical
‘eonventicns.and 19 tho princimal Rest to rodical conventions:
here in Hocicd. An elstorate book was published by Seguro |

an Social oa suzpazy of the hard and Luis! wors in that field. :
wo, co “J riention tha ateve sinco-it sst=s to got tho steze for scrcoss ©
of : who aleit believe that, eociz2isa and socialized: nodicine is
good, becauso ho pinself hes profited so greatly froa it.

. Further, ‘Luis and Sylvia hed nado it Imowm for quite soz
. : tine that thoy wanted to have tho fare:o1) party for DESHARD
oo an their hess. I alixys fol} that this was duo to communt:t
synpathy. Mow I don't Inow. Ani T an at a loss to explain wy
they ineisted uyon holding the party. They do not. sect to be y
close friends of DISHAND, are soncunat different in social :
_ and inteMoctuil status, and no Jongor ‘seca to no to ba cone. :
mimist syapathycors. . . : :

Leis consented thet Mask DIEXARDIs son would probably cone
to tho purty sincs they have ro raid. Incidentally, he did net
cone. Eo then stated that the boy still ppeks no Sranish at all.

_. He added that the boy has lived in Mexico for five years and
- before that for soveral years in Guba. Luis explained that
the Soviets are afraid to havo their children. see how the world
really is. Luis added that Kruschey sau a supereuarket in
Les Angelos and wsinply -coulin't beliova his eyes. Luis was
frankly critical-of the Soviets ani their intellectual isolation.
Se mo oe . .

7. DIEHAND MLOST RET DIELARD and his wife both con-
ceded that there was a good chanco ‘they night cone right back
to Yexico. She told no that if sho did, sio woul Like to teach .
me Russian. Wo had exchanged a few elesentary words during the

: evening. -

| : 7 be went? hes age lo Lasve keer k
4 7 | San AY whi aroha hon Sete wha
| tee


--- Page 366 ---
be

“~e ne a ine Leo we _
CL ee
we LLIB!

SHE. . f . C/cVvh, .

“WEMORANDUM

a “WSxteo, D.F., Soptionbre 26 da 1969.
ao - been L : _ - y

on relacién ol asunto dol italiano, que henos tratado, me per= :
mito indicarte que lo azistad se inicié por la necésidad de -- : ;
. traducir unos docurentos. ofictales que nos solicitaba la Secre- ;
terfa de Gobernacién, por medio de los ousles debdfanos demos ot
tyrar el nombre correcto de wi cliente. : : : Gy

Dicha amistad se ha conservado bajo un nivel noraal y tis o mw
nog 69 inicié hace aproxinadarante un.afio, sin que se hayan tee of

- nido otras citas coro no es pura tovur alguios tragod o almor = it
zare . ; . J,
Sin embargo, el dia de ayer mismo se hizo una cita Ia cual se ~ : : »
llevar$-aséfecto el dfa de mafiann y ya ne pernitiré informar --
te rfs sobre el particular. | an

we tM paseo

oD Leer, ene Ul

: ope ge aN!
PE EXPECTS TE MET AT 8 RET MRAET OE
ge Se pm pewresl 18 FE& CIbaes end Te
: bye Beepie RECATIEAL !

3A sid Ae:
. a gy Se POP -
BL Fh AB EOR REM ALL Po ese EP

: . . wl Hy
Pew At PEPE BS SOelOn © CR
Lode

Cet Chetek iT bE Fe Tea! ae Tee

: . ae. a
ed Ba sab of BITE.

oor Bish «
pert LEGlke

DERELOI MET

Lo, [. heerse =/ (ot be gH ¢ bent hoy ahr

Lz as bee “5

re NA


--- Page 367 ---
SECRET

26 Septenber 1969

nro 2 Chief, CUBA _
: Relationship Between AEDIEHARD and Gloria PINTO

. ‘1, In response to a conversation between Chief, SB, and the under-
‘signed, LIREALM~1 was questioned inetail on. 25 September concerning _
“the relationship which exixts between AEDIZHARD and Gloria PINTO with a
view toward possible embarrassment of AZDIEHARD before his superiors.

coorvs =-@q ” LIREALM*L atid his wife both belfeve (but have no proof) that
-it is probable that Gloria PINTO is having or hag had an affair with.
ASDIEHARD. Both LIREALM-and his wife are close friends of the PINTO's
snd know that Gloria 18 strongly attracted to AEDIEHARD who is beth
physically. and intellectually superior to her husband. fue to Gloria's
continued friendship with AEDIEHARD at the French Club aad other placés,
LIREALM-1 feels sure that Gloria's husband, Pepe, does not yet know of
the affair. : : . u .

3.  LIREALM"1 characterized Pepe PINTO as; aweet, slow-witted and
below average in intelligence. “He ia a physician Specializing in lung dis-
orders, born in the Canary Islands, He considers himself a Spaniard with
the €haracteristic Spanish lack of respect for women, He attempts to
“gigutiy control Gloria's activities while, according to Gloria, having

aa many affairs himself as he can, Gloria geeatly resents Pepe's attitude
_ toward her, Pepe 1s basically defensive and would.not vant anyone to know
if Gloria were having.an affair with another man, He vould probably deny

it 4f anyone said so, even if he were aware of it. fe would take it cut on
Gloria, however, and would probably beat her and restrict her covements even

more closely, | :

: 4. In view of the above, it would certainly appear that there would ba _
nothing to gain, and perhaps such to lodse, by any attempt at exposing her
supposed affair with ABDIEHARD. Since che now appears to be in coatact with
SHEVCHENKO, much better to hope for better developments in thia case. ~

“y,

Andrew E, PELLEMENT

SECRET



--- Page 368 ---
nee PoTSG2

Soe ye fn
2. Agent/subfest: Liconye5 DATE: 25 Septeber 1969
2. Case Officer Viheent Pp. Rizzuto Va ; oo ee oe
3. Pate ant site oficontact: 25 September: Cafeturia Parque _

i . . ‘

bed.

. ‘ rn :
paragraph 5 (contigued)
4t off than attempt to collect the money.

There are sufficient
funds inthe Project, ) :

1
: : i
* paragraph 7. (eontinied) m ; ue |

is more to this invitation than meets the eye and that the KGB will.
be going all Gut to recruit him, I think Subject may be right and .
Y think he should probably find a good. excuse for not going.

Subject states that ho had complained to KAZANTSEV (P-880) about

the shoddy treatment he had been getting from LOGINOV (P-11,712)... -
Never before had he beon forced to "stand in line" for Soviet visas - 7
H

for his clients, In the past, he had boen able to sent passports
“to the Sovict Embassy any day—-never mind the office hours--and get
: the passports back with yisa the samo day, Subject: says that . eget baeets
a LOGINOV himself finilly admitted that thisWwas bodgiuser Suject= t= nae " }
wo. been uncooperative ‘(meaning that he had refused to let LOGINOV
| yeeruit him). Subjéct. says. unequivocally that LOGINOV is leaving -

PCS by the end of October and that he is not being replaced by a

newcomer, Subject understands thatNECHIPORENKO, who in a former tour
ked in the Consular Section, will take over as Chiet « of the .

Consular Section when LOGINOV leaves,

L Subject days that KAZANTSEV is about to leave (in fact, Subjeét
thought KAZANTSEV had alyeady left} and that both a replacement for

hin and a@ now ambassador were on the way, I told Subject that as os
far as I knew, KAZANTSEV was to be replaced by another conelerge Covregad
who would be Chargé, but Subject insisted that an ambassador had

been named and would be coming soon. He ‘did not know who the

ambassador would be.
Nn Ee,

. Subject renarked that both IVANOV aod NIXITO. “OY had left and he
said that NIKITOYOV. was ;- he. thought, a very decent person,

Arter nee

_ Subject said that prixnopso (P~2270) had come to see him to say;
goodbye. PRIKHODKO had said, alnost with tears in his oyes, that
Subject had been a very good friend and that he vould never forget
him, He invited Subject and wife to come visit him in Moscow,
Then when Subject asked PRIK'UCDXO for his address, PRIKHODKO hemned .
and hawed and said that ho didn’t really have an address yet but

‘that Subject could write him in care of Latin American Dopartnent of |
the Ministry of foreign Affairs, Subject remarked that PRIAHCDKO . |
i

was undoubtedly being sincere, but when you cano right dovwa to it,
ho wag just as henned in and afraid as anything of the others,
Subject sald thae tt vas a real tragedy that the Soviet systen

made Buch robots out of good pouple,


--- Page 369 ---
-00000

bBo ,

EL EMBAJADOR. de China.|Cuauhtémee y ta Vidriers y
_[Chih-Ping Chen, asiste como serdn ceciatades huéspedes de
‘|mlembro de ta delegactén de;honer de ja cludad por et al-
_]su pala a la Asamblea C cade. ‘Tendran ademas ban-
frat de las Naclones’ Unidas. [queles y un balle de gala en
Regresaraé. a_medintos de dl- el Casina de Monterrey... Ft
ico est como} consul ce la Unién de Republi.
eas Sovlalistas Sovidticax, Vie
nistro consejere Chin-Hsien lentin S. Loguinov dard uns 4
fiesta en ta embafada de xt
~-culzada de ‘Treubuya
dia una eens en honor det se-}201- el primero de octubre a
cretarla de Comunicaciones y las 19 horas, paras agradecer
‘Transportes; Antonto Paditia] las atencionés yt amistad
Segura. a la que asisierdén va-j que se le ha brinddde en Mé.
clas amlyos del anfitrién y det; xlro. Durante ese? fiesta ite .
asasajado... Keith Willan despedida, e: prpsidente del -
‘cer secretarta de 1a} Cuerpo Consular en Méxivu, oo ‘
i wt Leander P. Vourvoiilias, fe ob:
Jsequiard, en nombre de lov
vénsules, tina handeja de pia-
ta. Leguinev es uno de toy
_. to... + -§na préxtma... Wolfang Re: dirigentes ‘del Curepo Consu-
mer, representante del Merva- lar en. Mésico... El embajader
dg Comin Europes, estd eh Mé j de Ecuador, Miguel Roca Geo
. ‘Ti ‘en platica’ con funciona- {0 ¥ su familia asistievon en
' . rios dé) gobierno y ditigentes Guadalajaca a la Feria Tater:
¢ . . de los hombres Q negoclos,| nacional de A ‘anlas en ia.
. . Varios diptoniatxes dc la em. | Que su pais pai
* bajada de Béigica Je dieron 13 ee *
: . hienvenida en el aeropuerto. .. . :
Regresé y asumid sus funclo
[nes ef decano det cuerpo ol
plomatica, embaiador de den
Paises Hafos, berdn Schelto
|r Heemstra, “Extuve varios |

mesea dé vacaciones en sit pat
2 . tris... La Compién Cultural
| det Cuerpo Consular en Mé
Aivn, ergantzadora de la can
jveneidn de,consules que habia |
isn Monterrey bow diae 27, 28 yj
L 29 de octibre, prepara un pry,
. glama que mantendsa a bos de!
[ices moy ocupadas: carr | :
fentos duiante ewe lore dias |
Vistiaran las grartea empre t
gas comm la Fuodtatacs, Hojala > .
ta ¥ Taming, Ta Jervecetiia,

j
;
:
4

i
i



--- Page 370 ---
iy

:
A.
H

Nenorendum
“TOs
_ From: .
, subject: " ABDIEHARD (pelt, me) a Thoughts: Ro porsibility of ‘Pitching ia

1.

SB/om = o feptember 23, 1969

RIZUTO through “ARCHBOLD

FERNALD

Assuming it wae agreed that A should be pitached before his PCS

departure, because there sre no indications that. he would be more sitscept~
ible ister to an approach: ‘later. when he comes to a new post abroad in few
yeare and, to the contrary; . it 1s more likely that he would be still more

daring, more nelfconfident and more. determined to advance and aolidify

his position within the KGB, I wish to add some viewe of mine to the list

of possibilities aa to how a pitch could be carried out.

2,

‘3.

My views and thoughts on thia subject will be based on the possible
use of existing essete and means, I em fully aware that there will ‘be
plenty of room for improvements,: additions and modifications of what will

be said in the following peras.

as far aa I know we ere lacking adequetely solid facts in which

we could put our teeth, doe. we do not weedtemes posses worthwhile mention=

ing materiel which we could use to exert a desired pressure on A.

4

e

T am

inclined to believe that we are ina position to make a

‘serious attempt to obtain a "pressure argument" through the use of existing
assets which are targeted against A and that it can be done without taking

an undue risk.

5

As a

nove in thia direction I was thinking in terma of having

recorded a SA3CRI<A meet for which we would prepare SABORI. To be more

specific I have in mind a situation along the following linas:

~ Re a, In going to one of hie next meeta with A,SABORI should

carry on his person a treaamitter. I an not in favor

Rae
ral ae" n ee of a body recorder, hecauee the recording tine is

MO =
ane 5 ve yy limited and it requiren the bearer to be turning it
» wy “x a en and off, while the tronrmitter oan te eet and it
ae” ‘ v an : -« . requires no notion by the baarer on one hand and on
. . ; a a
. igtentaee er we the other the dearer ja under the ispresaion that
pe phe a OO / . i
ye tye ih “at wy . _
whore ©

:


--- Page 371 ---
-2e
i 4

every. notion and atatenent of his ie recorded from
the. monent ‘the . trananitter ie etrapped on hin.

be SABCRI should 60 to such a meet with experession of |
a person who is in exceptionally good mood, because |
-of a business succesa and he wae given a substantial |
advance on hits commiasions After A and SARORI have
their routine two drinks, SABORI will state to A that
- “he would piok up the tab for the evening ( after being
: treated by A so many times ) but he would want to
celebrate the ocoasion. It would be desirable that A
agrees. on & drink or two to please S, but even if that
does not take place, it ie enticipated that A would
want to accompany sk in hie good humors. What ever
ve the case, the gituation lends itself to a free
talking, eritical commenting and some bitching, juat
tu play it big. Jt will be up to ud, to prepare S as
to how to run the benvereation to get out of Aa few
statements which he would not like hie superiors to
know abouts

a.
a
=
E
ay
bs
¢
ea
B

! c. As far as 5 is céncerhed I believe that he can be

ao " persuaded to carry e transmitter on hie person and
as ‘a reason for requesting it we could tell hia that
it represented a complinetary element to the PAQ whioh
he made on A, because the psychologist | who reviewed
hia PAQ conniderdit essential to have a tape covering
one meet. There 1s no way of hiding the fact that we
will be recording what is transmitted, but vo will
not have to give any explonatione regerding how it
will be done.

I hope that one way or the other we wi11%{a posaesaion
of a tape which could be usad ae a pressure factor. ;
Prom there on all becomes & matter of anrupuletion:r

‘S may requert 6 meet with A under the pretext that
that the peoply Interested in the platinum doal sent
to € their apectaliet, who would like to cleer sore

qd

.



--- Page 372 ---
1300000 +

€ 37/ - : : . ; . . : :

-S-
questions before opening the Jetter of ¢redit and that
it. war essential that the person who arrived here see
As because ‘that will strangthen S' position in the deal.
I mentioned the. platinum deal because it would give — oe
some. common ground to the new person being inteoduced :
: on the seeney, but some other ‘tory might. be ae good.

‘e. The ‘new peraon showing up under the platioum deal

‘or any other pretext would. be a case officer of ours.

I feel that such a person. should at firet sight show

that he wae a Yankee,-that he be versed in platinum

or what ever the pretext may be and that he should be

a Russian language speaker. I am inclined to believe

that after some business. talk and after ereating an
atnosple® of mtual understanding there would te no

problem for the case officer to start speaking Russian.
. If A takes this fact in good. mood and the business
ot conversation. continues in Russian, S would be in a :
j __ position to-excuse himself as a person who was no longer -
oe needed, It is almost impossible tc anticipate what. ‘
would be Ab reaction to the fact that § wanted to leave.

If insisted that S stay, we will have to accept it.
Nevertheless, S will be ‘instructed to go to the bathrgon’
for a waile and the case officer will have to use this
opportunity to drop his cover and go on with his job.

He will have in his pocket a reel of ‘tape to counteract.

Ab emphatic refusal ( which we must anticipate ).

nie Sin a OP AORN ERNST

f. It may be nentioned that S will not have to know
anything about the existance. of the tepe and as far :
aa the case officer is concerned S may have to be ,
satiafied with ‘the explanstion that the c.o. wae the
psychologist who herve that he wanted to- meet A in
person. Of cours@,* ao eben mae bear out this cover, but
that will be at the stage gfdezelapuerts when we
could not care lesa. ,

ce There 16 no doubt that § will be burned whether the



--- Page 373 ---
i
‘

DTT rei desea ater atthe anne eNOS ER AEs PSMA oS ey CECE EPS

SEN

the things turn out Fight orwrong, but S will be left
only with, guesses: as to what. transpired between the
ease officer and.A in Russian. _

. Bay is- the- fate of: any “officer aking the pitch “to fie
‘be burned if the: egaersice | enda in anything: less than

" @ success. Therefore, it would be worthwhile considering,
to get a suitable lagusge ‘Speaker: case officer from
«Eas for this purpose,

6. “I em aware of the fact that aes the anova ‘discussed scheme haa

a@ quite certain weakness in ae mict as it is built on and around an untested -_

asset as S is, Nevertheless, in terms of security and protection of Agency/_
Xusutz Station assets the scheme ia advantageous, which is seifevident.
Te It should be assumed that S might come up with some objections

when it comes to introducing another. person to A from fear that he would’
deal: himself out of the game and terminate his usefulness to us. I do

;. pot consider 4t difficult to put him at ease.

. Be For your consideration and comments.

ted git °
- , e fee. pred) ann erkeneon a
) one matt se ~ye an

butted oy Ay ao an. .
7 2) Q fon Ze acy 3) és af 2, shy oa Oh ak
i feces we Z
farenteels s & Likiclerras aypunk * whe flenal A Oe

! abna wha’ J mw pe (Con ay ke orey SDF
. 7, Jrenont bane At die : Soapel ry RRO
U

: 0 tet Chily, bx < phd, hgnate Ty
. 3) mel ht et Caty er rae tech eee te “4 . r

- 4) oy lerks Maw ast ALf wet Alig mF 7” pots

early LP Qetrin ~ we Hine Fo ores

pat Feleys wal fou Sint wile, he prlbr, wt kat; haw ob oyna he &
“pid ;

KA Kota 1 UPR eh

_BaPernald . : ; a ay


--- Page 374 ---
esis engat sna Finn tabtio NOMEN Hew) RM wens ong en smittseuemmnatarsanite ree eae sesce enesermren origeweine METS
snag tenet eat ~ $
. - . heneaneey murctnneen ee erat S Mt,

- Secretary while younrer men ere

now.

. on . a.
Agree that blackmail wor't work = tut in reading file.rarr trpine that qtands out
(to me at least) is the energy with which AEIEHARD pursues his career. Believe
a ar we are willing to burn sacont, it

he: ta ruthlessly amtitious to get aneei
might, be advantageous to insert eentor ‘Ruesien speaking staffer as suggonted in this

paper Cont without trenenitter) who will ake A offer to think over on long cold

_ Moscow nighte orior to his arrival at a new cost. our offer will consist, ‘of first,

sewing seeds of discontent on fact ‘that. he is now 42 years oB wt has not risen

to the heights in his profese! on that ke eoutd have. (Ye is only ate as 3ré

lat ard 2nd Secreteries ) I aon't. krow his KCB

rank but it can be intimeted ‘that ve know hie renk eauld be higher, Teiking fast.
we could then stgreat to A tant we will work ont a olen in his abeence wheraby

we can aid his future career ty o:tting kis in hig peth eaventereous situations

auch as allowing tim to “recruit” a U.S. official at hir next fost. In return, he
world service our renuiremnte d-ring, his tour, Our moreine rélationssin with A
sould: have a time limit with control factore on both aides. “No answer is wanted
Renort the approech if you wish, The offer wil] be good upon your arrival

at the new post whereever it ies (A, of gourse, will thin the talk is recorded
so there must be some way of assuring him it ig not. SABORI, naturally, must be

absent.)

a « bed cain, but je. team ley
yar? be frauen Lb, LUA, ore? 7
Qh jr Gurney SAB ORS | but GP dmt: fering
Aedebaad optim Lo elf lau
4 cutepucsl 7 7 7
yi ay a Alale cme one 4 f pen,

’ ores os
nee eae ales 6, (ad (Lee dey an ees 5
LL oa


--- Page 375 ---
WISN AASS Ho geen Ne vised enseemanater tite roe TI ATE

IRE COE ED Si toe

Ja

“5.

ASL SNS 4

8.

gece.

Supervisor i

“perTmg date/time

That Tee: FRO Py Pore
Ee Saws toe
- We tenes

pate: 24 -{ xX ~l~]

: ornw Foamy aA MERCI)
Jolin PSATDERECL Cun /P :

Salesnin/Contact

location: t
NEXT NIG date/tine ¢

location

Adrifuts tration 2

Instructions issued

Report from salesman: : : : + yon
Craxa Pato cneerd sek wit na “ro FOI Hea
AEMENR oS With

ce) Yoon & of We. Gorne2.

Conpetition activity: :

Sanderson comssats 20

|


--- Page 376 ---
MS EUG TAH bremE EE OT

2 HMR,

4.

5.

6.

Splesman Olea _Cheyehanko : ae

, spr
Supervisor Yoda Francis => AREA oy ae : ! ar
Date/meeting  L3sTX-6%. 1000-1100 hours _ ope.
Site ae “Ere yh : tt 7

pDate/roxt mtg. 3

Site

Aa@ministrative
Not applicable ,

Instructions to secon PIES lis DE a, oy

- |Not applicable

Report. by salesman...

‘was been playing tennis for two years. Hevever, —
has always been active in sports, especially basketball
and volleyball. . , ;

‘Hovde. Asked is I new Bill Hovey (could have been
"Said this was’a businessman, an American but with
ry rank, The Directory shows .

he tem ae cremains eatin it cee ema iqumeteras tesa pase 8 re rine teint nm

Col. William J. Hovde (Am.)s wife, Norma..

aan
are we. poo G. (Am.))s Destilby S.A., Miguel Cervantes” |
OF Saavedra 25, 2.17. Tel. 45-65-60. Res. Rio |

i, i.” Eseondido 20, Lomas=Hip., 2.10. Tel.20-71-38. |

pk Clubs: ChapGolf, WhFr, NavyL. . i

Note: Win's address is Rio Esc. 26. :

Lo . Lo ; i

- 8. Competition _ . : ; :
4 . ae

i See item #9, . . . J

boa. . . :

to . :

9. Suporvisor's comments — , . : :

‘1eIt is possible that Oleg had been planning to con-
tact me ‘and had deliberately had placed himself in ry
spaths | .

. 2iIt is also possible that Oleg, like all the other
Soviets, hates to Spand money and would rather play with
another club member than to spend money on an instructor.
He may be trying to build up a group of friends or ace
quaintances with whom he can POARTINKHIKKELLXKDK PLAY»

. *Cgontinued next page)



--- Page 377 ---
3-000

p37 a ;

9. Supervisor's coments (continued) | :

™ 3, If he had teen looking far me, it could be 4 |
nn Los sos that he has been asked to step in where val failed. . \
oO : . phat is,.as an American friend, I never invited val
- ‘to my home. He never met other Americans through
ma. Note, however, that he never gdnvited me to his
home either--though he did invite us frequently to ij
various events which were under the auspices of the .to4
Soviet embssy. We did net but rarely accept, One :
such-occasion was the Moscow circus. — 4

: .
& . 4. Ig he had keen looking for me, it could be oan
that he wants to assure his acceptance by our tennis a . :
group where Gloria Pinto is: a possible target. Oleg 4 . .
has gotten to Gloria, but I, the American who is : yo
somewhat and Sometimes hostile to soviets, might, be ee

considered a. stumbling block, Perhaps he, Oleg, will

try to reach all the other members of the group in- x.
dividually so thet an invitation by Gloria to one of i
our functions will meet with general acceptances :

Soy eras algo

SCENARIO OF CONTACT |
Y arrived about 0900 and took an instructor, ,

About 0950 Oleg arrived to play with and ine
structor on the adjoining court. He made no effort to
. greet me. He had been pointed out to me by Val, but
af wae a I had not been pointed out to him do my Knowledge-~

. : : oe though it is certain that Oleg and jval must have : '

- . : discussed the “players" in thair"game" and counted
eS . — . ma as possibly on the other. team, That is, 1 am sure:

2 . oO . that Val has pointed me out to Oleg, but Oleg would .

not have wanted to acknowledge this.

a re

At 1000 my hour was up and I told my instructor

so I was through--I d@id not want to continue for another

oo hour. As I was paying my instructor I noticed that _
a possibly

i Po Oleg was paying his. It is very unusual an

: - even had form to take an instructor for less than
, half-an-hour, I am suggesting that he wanted to be
free to contrive an accidental meeting with me. —

Lot I set a course for one of the several gates 4
. . from the courts we were using. I could see that Oleg :
* had headed for the same gate (this could have been
¥ - . : perfectly natural) and at a speed which after some
: : thirty yards would bring him to the gate at the same :
moment as I (this was not entirely natural).

. Since I had an excuse to greet him, having had
him pointed out in front of Pepe Pinto the preceding

. week, I did so, I xxkgi said Good Morning and asked
if Kal were here. He looked very pleased (I kthoughs

possibly relieved) when I took the initiative and
recognized hime oe .



--- Page 378 ---
14-0000

pe

37?

“y

A .

Oleg said that val had not arrived &s far a5
the knew. I said I ted been training to get ready for
val. I wanted my revenge for last weeX.

used by this and immediately asked

nee Val was not
a played for about

mo , Oleg seemed ari t
4£ I would like to play with him si
here. I agreed. We found @ court 4n

_ one hour. Olgg won 6-3, 6-4.

Oleg is very athletic in appearance and. played
and excellent game for someone who has played for -
a only two years (if this is true). He has enormous |
- Fal muscular thighs. It escapes me what sport would’
produce this, other than weightiif£ting. Weightlifting
a is out since his upper torso, though muscular, is far
Na ran less developed than his legs, Basketball does not seem -

likely to produce his particular kind of development «

Oleg 4S pleasant, Speaks excellent spanish. Has
not mado any political comments (yet!). Seems more
intelligent, but less extroverted than Val.

t

t

‘

:

t
, Oleg asked if I were with the American ‘Embassy. ;
I answered"no, I have my. own business", It was then H
that he asked if I- knoew another "Bill" who is in
private business aya who xa has an army rank. Oleg
&homylnasyoxs thought the other person was a ra Jor.”
{
|
!
i
|
i
|
|
t
i
i
Hy

Sapp ifa Sede ie pew ain EY

t left at this point. Oleg stayed on to play
some nore. My wife could not see him and it is not
therefore, known with whom or how. much longet Oleg
did play. Val was not seen during the course of the a
morning. The Pintos are in San Francisco.



--- Page 379 ---
a

Q
~<S
it

September 11, 1969

SA Geet
Contact Report
Subject: Jinmy SABORI (P-13,830)
Pate. of Heet; Sept 10 et faztorns-Lafragua at 1700 lire

a Prearranged meet end & $ cara 10 min carly.

NEXT SEETs Friday Sept12 ‘at Chez Rene at. 2000 hrs.

2. . Instead of receiving the Agency Contract from the loon Valley. Corp.
Dallas, Texas, he received 4 phone call (his phone was connacted) on ny
Sept 10 in the morning and was requested to sign the contract immediately
and return it by regiotered mail, The caller (Leater NacGhee) told S that ©
the contract wan mailed "Registered—Return Receipt" on Mon Sept88 ". S con-

eluded that he expected receiving it on Eept 11, but more likely on Sept. 12.:

{

3 'S was disappointed because he counted on showing the contract to |

AEDIEHARD that evening end the atsence of the contract will necessitate. |

another moet with A when the contract errives. FERNALD repeated to S that |
he needed a Xerox copy of the sexe and decided to meet with S on Sept 12

to debrief him on his meet with A and get a copy of the contract. 1.

, }

i

H

1

:

. 4 S will not have much to report to A wher he ;meete hia that evening. |”
S went to the Hotel Geneve where a friend of his used to be a8 manager and

_ was aisenchanted waen he found out that he no longer ‘worked . there. The new

| manager did not want to show him the re ater of guests and hia atteapt :
to spot a girl or girls who lived in the hotel and appeared to be working
vore no results, because 811 he was able to see or. exchange few words were
tourists. S spoke to TANG by phone to inform hin that the Iuau maneger. :
wanted to check with the embassy on tne size of the. adit he wee to place

in the monthly HISSION. TANG stated that he would ‘take cere of that and

he reminded S that WANS wanted to see the article before it was printed, ,
Other, than to capitalize on the info that Ech severria’ vould be the next
President of Hexico and speak about the platinun deel S had practically

nothing to roport. : ; i:

5. F repeated the instruction he gave S on Sept 8 with regard ‘to

etalling IS activitico with A end as far Hy the pistinua deal wae concerned
dFefwill detersine our attitude.

it was made clear that hia fair and oqu
’ BuFerneld

ey



--- Page 380 ---
14-0000

& ‘
# I. “
7 z we :
Ep : do not Ce i
B _
§ 1 :
a - 2 “4
Fy
i
5
1 3
i
i.
;
at
:
!
i
p.
eee ,
if
‘
H
,
i
i :
|
}
!
. rt
{
L300 i



--- Page 381 ---
[4-00000

_ Contact Heport

a , a

i mo September. 9, 1569

Subject: Jinny SABORI ” (7-13, 830)
Date of Meet: Sept 8 at Ces Rene at 1400 Hre

1. The meet wag prearranged and S came on time. The neet lasted .

about 3 hours.
NEXT MEET: sept 10 at 1700 hre at SAMBORNS-La fragua ar 8
does not request ‘to seo me oerlier. :

2. S| was advised by phone from Dallas, Texas, that the Boon valley
Corporation waw able to meet the Sov requirements concerning the pletinun

. deal and that they mailed on Sat Sept 6 4 contract (agency contract) to

s which enadles him to: ‘purchase 10 ounces of platinum per month from the
Sov seller ( on export company ). According to the same phone message
the contract provides for a uss3. 0O commission per ounce. :

3. Ss hopes to reccive the contract before he weets with AEDIBHAED

on Sept 10 at 2000 hra. On his own intiative S decided that he would

went to show the contract to FERNALD before taking it to A. That was the’
reason for ‘arranging another meet with F before the scheduled meet with -
Ae .

4e The gensrous commission provided for by the contract enables

8 to offer to A US$1.00 per ounce. Rven if the minimum required by Sovs’
ie purchead e*1.< commission per os. would etill net $20.000.~, according
to B' aptinates. S anticipates that the purchases would go above the
required miniwum, B was taking in. consideration the possibility that

A would not want to accept any commission.ami Thorefore, 3 came up wifh

@ scheme vy whieh there would be a benk account for A and the soney would
bo bie. whether he wanted it or not, or botter eaid , it would be up

to his tooide when he wanted to uso it.

S. At thie point 4% pay be mentioned that apert of the fact whether
the fove would want to clove the platinus deal the entire shove meationed
account 10 atriatly © interpretation of what he ase told over the phere

nner vinet reser ime tacenaquaneuacveuaasnioenene ane



--- Page 382 ---
14-0000

38!

j

H

| and only the copy of the Moon Valley Agenoy Contrat with § will olarify aa

many questions one would like to ask right now. Nevertheless, it eppeara.
| to ta probable that ga Agency Cohtratt was promised to &.. moe

|

i

|

6. ssn ‘spite of the fact that at the tize of. this writing ‘one ean.
deal only: with *3fo®, it ie worthwhile mentioning that § believes that ;
A would like to fsctlitate § to get the deal, because in that case § would |
_ be on one hand morally obliged to him and on the other S would had
collected a nice eus of money. In turn thie would sake A feel that he
i obtained a sstisfactory control factor over S and the rest ie quite ob-
j vious. (Other than reecurring to methods which are quite rarely used gainst
people: ‘ao 8, wa ia a situation of a very inconfortabie spectator left with
| a hope or @ which that A might go for the commission.

: 7. : _ Ag far as 8" willingness to give to A the attractive chunk of -
i money te concerned he is doing it for a. double purpose: to please us
| (indirect protectioa of his. interest) and to protect his interest directly
by assuring AW willingness to help him in getting the deal.

8. -- Although, our situation 1s not pleasant ( if tke deal ia to i
materialise) we are not helpless onlookers.’ S mentioned that if it comes
to closing of the deal he will have to travel to Zurich, Switzerland, and :
for tt he needs a passport. How such 8 is avare ¢ of our control position | :
{ dy enabling hin to get a pessport fast or dvagging ite granting) ean be | :

best illustrated by the fact that he told F that he would certainly put

. aside a worthwhile oun for ¥. Needless to mention thet FP gave him a tteaeen
dara good leeture whenxhexesxtiznyg when he made his silly statement.
Willy-willy P was obliged to turn weakness into etregth and 8 understood
that he could os well forget avout the deal ( if it comea hie way ) if
he would not play it fair and equere with us.. ibe

9 S brought up quite reasonably the question that A would most likely
pat pressure on him to got producing along the lines of acsignzents against |
the US Epbassy and os ‘tho first thing the question of obtaining the
Habsesy phone directory would be thrown in © lap.

“F106 P told 8 thot beosuse of the new developaont in the platinun
business F will allow § to follow At instruction tm as to how to go about
getting tho directory. F told his to go cheed and look up all the USIS yo



--- Page 383 ---
aan nt

: girls ho cen find in the Hotel Geneve and report to A his findings. P point-

ed out that we demand fron hin to stall as much 68 possible. On S ‘remark

“that. he “should have something to report to A when he sees. him on Sept. 10
FP commented that. jhe. will have no objection that & report his. findings.

11. |: 8 really stalled al2 he was able in connection with the Chinese
Embasey; he did not go there at ally because he etill did not obtain the

: ad fron the restaurant Tueu.

12,0 ~—” after’ the above conv § completed the PAQ, which is attached
hereto. 4 : .
13. "Ss toia "P that his. home phone was _disconneated pacause he dia not

: have. money to pay the bill of MN 632.- This happened at unconvenient tine

because. the Moon Valley from Dalles, Texas, was not able to reach him and
they were obliged to contact hin through a friend wg of his. F antioipated
that S would in one or the other way be asking for money and he had with
him a filled receipt for HH500.~ which"Be gave him . P implied that he
would give him a couple hundred pesos more at his earliest convenience.

14. . Then, S spoke about the presidential race and etated that
‘the Gobernacion Secretary Echevarria would be the FRI official candidate

“and that the public announcement to that effect would be made on sept 19.

FP phoned this info to ARCHBOLD. See Attachment. —

' BHFernald._.


--- Page 384 ---
| :
MEMORANDUM FOR THE. REOORD
FRoM :cusa/reztexenr {7
SUBJECT: Recent and Proposed Contact Between LIREALM*1 and AEDIEHARD

6 September 1969

1.) At the 5 September 1969 meeting between LIREALM-1 and Andrew E.
PELLEMENT, the folloging iaformation was received from and discussed with -

yo LRBRALMAL:
| a. LIREALM-1, following Seation advi s2htt%oa the the recent BY.
tay > owing Station advice e the recen
Peet
pele

incident where AEDIEHARD approached LIREALM-1 with an offer to pay LIREAEM-} “

for any information he could obtain from the U.S. Embassy, has avoided . N
LIREALM~1's wife, an almost pe Y

i a
} contact with AEDIEHARD at the French Club.
Y daily visitor to the Club, has been asked by LIREALM*! to note AEDIERARD's wi, hae

activities and associates and report anything interesting to LIREALM-1, = _\/~ ‘ wes a
ot : : SY an
7 -b. Mrs, LIREALM recently told LIREALM-1 that for a number of pi yeh
consecutive Saturdays; AEDIEHARD had brought a young lady, whom MRa LIREALM ee

thinks to be German, to the Club as his guest. Mrs. LIREALM did not attempt
to determine the identity of the female, but reported the information to

r A her huaband. ‘Ste has noted no other items of interest in “AEDIEHARD'@ :
” pattern of attivities at the Club. He has not seemed to single out any . : ye ;
7 - individual as @ tennis partner, nor ia he frequently seen socializing with | \ : n :
. . . . of

anyone in particular while at the Club. 4 ee
. ' : . : . ¥
2. LIREALM*1 was advised that the Station had learned that. AEDIEHARD Oy cy,

/ will hot return to MHHARSH immediatezy as originally thought, but he will 1S qa

‘probably resain in Mexico for another five-months. LIREALM-l was told that
thie information was: not yet public knowledge, but the Station would like
. LIREALM=1 to confirm this if possible. This led to a general discussion of :
Z LIREALMt1's association with AEDIEHARD since the recent incident. LIBEALM-1 .
- - was instructed that it was not the Station's wish that he avoid contact with soe
AEDIEHARD ‘but rather that he aot single out AEDIEHARD for special attention Le
or closely court his friendship. It 1a the writer's optaion that a eufficleat
_ time has elapsed. since the last incident for LIREALM-1 to again renew some
associstion with AEDIEHARD, and a particulerly opportune chance to do #0 ts
i . available: LIREALM-1 and AEDIEHARD both belong (as has previousiy been reported)
; 7 ; to a group of teanis enthysfasts at the Club who take Curns entertaining each :
. me other in their homes, To date, 411 the members of this group have given parties oe
except LIREALM-1. Mrs. LIREALM, following th@incident and thinking that AEDIEHARD
was soon to depart, haa stated that she id not want to have AZDIERARD in her
home since he represents a governuent so opposed to the principles of her govera- . ‘
ment, ete. Based on ASDIFEAND's extension in Mexico and the fact thet the LIREALM's
owe their friends a party, LIREALM was {nstructed to plan a party for the group
and to include AEDIEHARD and his wife in the group invited. At the party, —
LIREALN71 should not focus an undue acount of attention oa AEDIEHARD, but should
take advantage of the opportunity to renew their general friendship and let the . °
matter, more or less, take its own head from there, As a firot step in thia
general direction, LIREALM*1 plans to yo to the Club over the weekdnd of 6-7
September at times whea AEDIEHARD usually playa tennis to at least vay hello.

Foe: PM, Nee SECRET



--- Page 385 ---
SECRET

3. A second reason why hoth LIREAMH-1 and his wife plan to go to the
Club is to see if they can identify the new "girl-friend" of AEDIEHARD,
LIREALM-1 saya he almost always carries his camera vith him when. he goes to
‘the club and frequently takes pictures of his wife and‘thelr friends, Under
- this pretext, he will try end take a picture of the girl friend {f the oppor=
_ tunity presents itself where it will not come to the attention of AEDIEHARD.

o 4. LIREALM-1 ie preparing a written teport fa ‘fome greater detail
concerning AEDIEHARD and his relationship with him since the inci3ent. He~
- (will akso attempt to see if his can get any more details about the girl fri-

end from his wife,

5. Tha substance of the above including the idea for the party has -
been verbally reported to C/SB and he is in accord with the plen for the party, —
which will be, at least in part, paid for out of Station funds.

SECRET



--- Page 386 ---
Temata ae anentan ener

Ng
NS

ay

ca

PROWCT SX

fe VAL wes Seen. poaiy.

Reeonn event
ar We BUT, Retovd
PTTQITION » 8 Conte tS crete Rope e
Que mny , 2. Omeine Sovets a Suey

“it Mute sry vs wen:

Vez : 3, Yryud ae,

fee

Salessan Vou Loewnov a Y 21 WD g
2. Supervisor Lizs. doug fe yt re
3. pate/mecting BL. vest 1464

site . fea U mars 4

4. Date/noxt mtg.

Site
5, Administrative ~~

6 Instructions fe salesman .

Deve [eer eS o9

More DETAILS “To. BE. OSIM sO:

NAME, Me eT Pen Bie.
a
7. Report by salesman

Teo Gtee (pire SOMES ‘ BE
Geaeman. ‘ :

8. Competition

with

9. Supervisor's comments : on _
MES GE Pes PEEU jus Motel NII
OVEREET AD, Sores

AND Cr! be

seme eet eR

?

oO ecweoeen: me test

eee ennai neniyea sn einem:

7,

w 2 we tm

4
te

Tae



--- Page 387 ---
PRODUCE SALES _RESCRT \ Dare / Rov tl. Wey

q byt Tew rh Cueee p

1. Salesman | Tasty:
2. ‘Suporvisor | : de char CU rtihas et A _

3. Date/meeting > “IN 36 Lenn
Site nen

4. Date/noxt mtg.

site Lo. ease
S, Administrative | | vo
\ a
fe
6s. Instructions to salosmaa /
we Report by salesman ‘ L) eae G.
Meg. Daw Fenacel wey antl { Nwi o |
ARE KPLALIMME TO ows Pee, (NELUDAE)
Sore treaty Strewr PEwson’ Peod |
YG cele eNess Poe i Triwit
oi grrovp rea ware As: Core O'S”
eennios BM spec thee, Loe wesso~S |
hrs SKPlee>s OO VOLUN de F0% ue 1
Sonéy SopgorT of Tus Nez cone |
GeeanT, ~ :
8. Competition _ ; :
4
9.58 rvisor* best at :
en & Ro ; .

ai Acree: THAT THRONE _ F
Wow Egor bS YP QDENENUEC oui |
BAY OPIhtb % QUEL SEOK TTP NOWETS, |
“(ve "ahs Trae A Ravesae. LOUD
te seg pegous, Ove Sry was
ly Posdedu, amie 12 Gs xoarteP “Wry



--- Page 388 ---
i
¥.
3

‘4 PRODYCT_SA

1. saleuman Laceatre Co Cepek |

2. Supervisor Ub ale Fame t —

3. Date/mocting CuIN 69. USu 2 e~2

She ecw CH Cut _

“4. Dato/next ntg: JS ; _ .
Site ee

‘

o

53 Administrative “or 7" ”

¢

6

Instructions to salesman

on

7. Report by salesman , . a: . :

> “nee Leave 6h Ocldi%er2, ~s bookive
Covw ARO Ww SENG LOU Days.

Vo Naw Jore toa BilusineTG vP WK

4

Pr: i: ot ~ a
iy rs Exveucte bop. Te bce Qtr op. |

8, Competition
r ~

9, Supervisor's comments ; :
ot . HS Gilt -ficery Guns Mot we yr
atte TS Pee’, <a CXry aD)

ge OP AB yuan 8 cer Phin, @ Gat-tos eo),


--- Page 389 ---
PROMUCT SALES RESORT | On ah. rf! otk 64 .

1. Saleuman . ote _{ ty. \ 2 Lap EMER EO

2. Supervisor erin a
Lief

3, Date/mecting % je. 69 US ~ Wyo 7
Site ; Bate watt LA Al wo i
- 4. Date/next mtg. : nn, acne i
settee
5, Adminictrative OUR ta es ; i
~ oo a : - 7 : oot : - i

6, Instructions to salesman -

_

2 Report by salesman

Auxtcery Dnee Tang Dipncwé, 7 Uye Me Siete)

“ c ds l&nan + AN4LE AIC: earky & etherte.
ang Giarue OF. Rw ey Vine Vougryiws
a) luns Sem pemyive. & lecons: Fare

bh Poo Ofer Pwo, Ul Enyunr
Vacewtie Su SOPPLEE HH Bayne oF poste _

Pzecon DIAG ~ ie SK tee Getty ¢
WEENLLE . ,

QO pert oe ~--])

ae

9. Supervisor's comments ; . 7
G APepEne —DaAG Cees hy SUE
ata) dd) ber po wens) Geos Re LON. 6
7 DEPIRS UE OHbeuS paeyereece wrt
Vine Compa a) Ge Ee A,



--- Page 390 ---
PRODUCT SALES REPORT Pere |ovi : uf ix. bf

#
y

1. Salesman Vereen Euu Ly Husain
2. Supervisor Mes.Sor Son ” an. FVVIENS

3. Date/mecting 4-TeuG4d.) Am.

‘site, (Geemen Cun :
4. Date/noxt megs Le W864 fm.

Site Sewer Guy
5, Administrative A :

6. Instructions to salesman

' 9. Report by salesman , ff
Kaen 4 Were PYSBANS cae € oa 7
Mexico ABout. SI% MonTHE HEO For
-Guice, The . lve is Loins ‘. fe Hus -

Band ik ow THE ‘EDYGATION ‘Dé pT:
the iS oT IN He Over ae big fr :

Ste 1S A class “At TENNIS puryer.
tHe as prosneey "B" .
a oo He was pesyine i Gonrow
a y yr Tomes, On Gowory.

PaaS 8. Competitio iz
. cn? we compe n j

$e

an ee

ana wy 9. Supervisor's commonts : _
fev TR ise coupe courd ACE

Me Wercentie Locomow Vane 6s -}
Ye x Aw Nouns "a" peng ere

ee ae er



--- Page 391 ---
= ~~, ae t q AX . ey .

PROD “t_SALSS_REPORT

tyit Towa

1. Salesman

: z. Supervisor Petia .
7 3. Date/meeting > TK sh .
: " site (as 7 ;
e 4. Date/next mtg. = ue a ; ;
i site
: 5. Aéministrative . oe
i
: 6. Instructions to salesman

ae Report by salesman . , . . : :
Meg. Ban Fennced ep and Dirvin Ge:
Cocplagmiu eG 7 ome pee, (uClLUAl
Sole Grrnly Sieeawr Pewsen6 pes:
muncliagners “we ayite mete / Tesivit

Heep WW pea we AS Cree OS |
Loe nou BM SNe EWE, ‘Loe. poksSONS
| oo pA NE SePRerseo [rvorveO The GO
s Sonép SoppoyT of THe Ney come—

oo eas . (e ELo ny.
: % _ &. Competition

9. Supervisor's comments

TH kere

at te 8 C2
READ Lor bs "W Ver NIC ovit- ,
ra ce! ay: Cpr [Le Ye hveeani of my vet,
pra 18S {AK “(thi TROON A REV eNSAL © eeu
ae Ae bes pre OS. Dow Brey ANS
Hp Powe, eyposer? 19 GS Kexasep Uy



--- Page 392 ---
Septernver 4, 1969

.

Contect Rerort .
Subject: ILTOVAL-1 (F~3403)
Bate of Meet: Sert 4, ot Hoyo 19 Rest at 1340 Hre.

l. The ‘neet was rrearrangced. - 7 _
Text meet: Sert 11 at the sane place at 1330 hro. .

on Von Sert 1 DYBZACOY told L-2\that . _
ort=

2. During the langucse class
»pe had a lunch with ABDIEILAMD- on Aug 29 and on that occasion A ac
j ted to come to, T.IRACOH~ts house for dinner on Sept 15 about 19¢0 93

! hours. TIRACO!-1 edded that vurdy Prep YSI (Fo 13,042) vould nek tno

WO

i attena the dinner. ee
| 3. TIBACOM-1 told L-l that he wanted to sind’ the sare dinner
T-1 with wife, re, REX and Cail, but his: wife refused to heve more :
gests than the to Sov courles, because they did not have svifient
syace and could not afford to srend the anount money the additional
nunber. of cuests would cost. He went on to sta te that even this way
he wes ina auite enborrascing situation vecayse he Would not have :

money to buy more than a ‘dott tle of Cantillo run. : : . sot '
4. t1 thanked a LISLC01 --l for thirting of hin ond added that he would | ,

not have been able to core for dinner that cvening because he had to
Give ‘e. ecless which -he ves not eble to, cencel, LIRACOM~1 felt releaved,

but he arrecred to be very nervous. I-l edéed, as mxxYek an afterthought .
thet he would bring to LISACOi-i a bottle of wisky, vecause his friend.

18 scheduled to core to town before Sert.15
riskey; if not sooner

| Octavio from Matenoros
fy end he usiclly brincs him ec courle of téttles of

i 7 \ t2 wos certa sin, that Cot wio would e211 on hin Sert 14 or 15 the

Uae
a7 Intest and in that ease Zed. could hend the bottle . to TIEACOH-1 on the
'- \evening of the rarty at, 210-2130 hrs. LIPACCT-1 felt thet this
" would be creat and that! 1-2 could remein with his guests for a drink.

e

& develorzents made it
-

to have his classes

5.

umneces

vie oF achins:

rieee. Turther, COiVR2l tole T-1 that he head aslced
the fishing imife T-l hed rocvested, bus A did not tmow
whether they hed then on stoex and if there were ary he would bring it

ConA Ts



--- Page 393 ---
_to the ewer,

S.. . PIOYAL-2 fet ecrtsin thet LIRACOM~l wes very nervous Guring the
elnss end, esreciclly, when he syrolze about his nec with AERINHARD Ana
the foutheorving Ginner. He went to the bathroon 2 tines in an how ana”
@ holf (he usrlly goes twiee vhen served the sere siount of sr)
This leca I-l to srecwlate that there misht te something fishy in ¥
comeetion with the dinner, inc} Maing the roscibility thet sEDrExdRp
requested to nect Tel at TITACOr-19 Picee and thet his wife sroifea
the rleng by. liriting the number. of reorle.fo keer the matter fron
Geveloping into wishful thinking I told I~1 that it wes possible that .-

| LIRACON-1, felt imberrassed for not, being able to invite hin to the,”
dirrer. L-1 cormented that LIBACON-1 had no venson to tell hin ony=
thing about the &imier and if he kept it to himself Shere 1 ronda had
been no rencson for enbvorrassment. Ne asreed that there wes no reacon

"to sreeulote, but to weit and sec. IL-l stated thet his hores went high.
because LIBACOT-1 told hin thet ASPIEUARD Jom st sted that that his is departure

Wes yostroned and thet he 2id not “count | on ‘leaving before the the end o of

reason for rostronenent of detarture.

Ts Requirement: In view of the fact that LIPACO 1 is used to

see at I~ls rlece wisky which doed not have the tex tags (stenys),
-beesuse he normally cets his from Octevio (2 Custons insrector. in /3}
Fatearoro ) I-l renvested that I supply hin a bottle of wiskey “uhical
entered the country tex free. ( I-1 usvally hes the Old For ds :

“ 8... _. For his rersone 1 use L-1 would like to borrow 2 John Tlei ok?
catclogue, the issue velid after Aug 18,'69. _ ; equt
: ; -_ yu
. frat ol
° ! BHFernald bh :

Decenber '69. Difficulty in finding a suiteble porlecement wes given as :



--- Page 394 ---
(then sug
agra. &
2

LIBATH! J

Ainites a! : 1 doiaysens ent ie

tic-uo. ne Qat vo wave var tacdfe and ebdld ond take

then hate pnt, therefore, aghe S could certinue ons me ting ot

al r, gene day. Thad no objection eo ve agrond to ante at - J a
Sunborn's, Tiher ‘< Beforma, an? orcened elaouwhore from that point. - | WA °

2. Subfec: did not oreo re cny notirs for me re his moeting -ith :
103 as T had rejnested but agtnred- rar t coat ree-Lled it vies :
then procezled to deceribe Lt to re uf 3

3. Subtent met L0G at the &
BO? hours, 29 az, as had bacn
voy

del safueto, 165 Liver ° 1, at
1 stayed in pestarrant-
wd ie ha hod si any of hig
hhed taat he hat seen Mohn") an? nee
L030 tered tae .o inton
amis ont didn's Sui feol the same
ied thet. this $9, at lexst ag far ag ha wis eoncamned,
% that som of tre peo-le were "intelli gesce?
that w 3 Subs

wats oe der
but if LOG te
the Subj enrtuinky did not feel
wag fix.d finanetally aa’ the 3

at Suet could kh
a report or tues
yo renoctod erst
se dnt in ce:
y for s ch r Re
wn asked by Subj., L639 of: ho Ge

ab Mue have unlindted finds Cor Sit

now he
as sui. LCI:

het ke hed aly

noney £
help Suds
i hal b
first of Cet a3
and ne therefore tis
sored that he could ¢
ing, bot no Inch. Ia any wyaat Se
a $ ay
ed

take. | LOD told

ret te Vesao:

o das

g wceme for a fave.eil (>)

eh told :
sled f
wed.
tale 29

-



--- Page 395 ---
14-0000

Wo te

’ . : . .
.
yo net in Savor ot
, te » ho: ary :
' mm
. ett
exclained
. as recaivad froa both sides Lary mowey
- eer pur ase O- rQugery .
. Ye seered to unt 2 waits :
: we metcat Senbormty az at. 2g ‘at ant I ainot very hal y about
2 foes meeting pl: ing witew ord hy anal as
. now, «2 xd “nat hare againe Bi not move frer tere
Flamie? to but Inas: were sitting in a rather ark
. t This: ent, ani De up-osa
ui nar Subs i r t fonase in .
general. ‘Le ne clabo: dtd net ¢ tha .

this

Host of

tere Speci

42199 PLL northeast
nova interested,
Sub Lex the

pi 3 nov so nucle 3 i
am of hu..anttge -

i dubg if ha te

s cory ones

fo nog ibis.
nth anoW

ravealing Se fast so pts >

’
. wet fo ». te gat
BGT een hen Drnavom po aed! y ae
2 . as end oA $ pe Ae ear! & Leck Abd of A
Anat 77 Ayo eels : Le ory? .
he . , ! ;
. Sm Ete Boers & ;
‘ op ’ , : aye A. Ask tepals
SPCC AM IN CC BY wy ASA ACG M2 , oy Aedes
: ‘a Ae axredl
font gern boas “es fon pet ~~ ne ane .
RY ee ee AS bnensy a
. ‘
Snel w ae c wer meh Oe tips
OC hanety WR AIH 4 j v
é Oe Ee ; Pevpek
. : ~ : toe

3



--- Page 396 ---
List of Soviets in Nextco passed out to all Case Officers on 27 Aug6d

‘ LOGINOV, Valentin Sergeyevich Ho is primarily targetted against Americans at
: Official Function: Third Secretary (Consul) | the US Embassy and specifically RVROCK. Ho
Wife: Aleksandra Dattriyevna . fe a ladies man who cultivates American women,
Residence: Ignacio Esteva 21-2 (Tacubaya) He ig an extremely active and skilled intel
Car: 31 DG (69 Green Chevie Chevelle) officer who deliberately needics US citizens
whors he believes to be RVROCK. ‘Attenpted an

be tart

female Embassy enployees. Additionally has

recently requested an agent to cultivate a

Chinese Embassy coployee from whom he wsnts

info re relations between Soviets and National =:

; Chinese egainst the Chicoms. LOGINOV is ;

. . . scheduled to leave Mexico ROS ia mid-Octoder. 1
Avid tennis player; has wide range of Mextcan =;
|
!

Intel Status: Known KGB .

.» Tour in Mexico: Aug 1965 = Open recruitment pitch to LIREALM-1 aftor so ;
_ Clubs:” Consular Association, Teench Club ‘accusing him. Has recently levied reqetrements {
se . ‘for aun Embassy phone book and info re American E

:

and third national contacts.

PM, Vid


--- Page 397 ---
14-000

TAqé&

Serene ee cee ea a cen tC A wane

c

Contact reports, etc., forwarded from the field.

!
|
|
i
H
| .
!
:
i

TTT sre nannranvenens areata ans INRA ait RE RET


--- Page 398 ---
14-0000

“347

-
USSR, Moscow : Translated dys MoAe -
ont 7 Nove 70 —

Ministry of Foreign Affates,
Consular Section,

Valentin LOGINOV

# ee

: a ; : - Mextoo, 2 Nov.1970

: ~ Dear Valya, ( L Oo it ~ wo, : .
It.doesnte seem to be crue, but tt is. 1 amwiting a. Lecter ((to you))e _
ee ob, . .
\. : ” several timas.I got ready to write, but couldn't because of either laziness

: .o or too auch works

yo One and a half years have “gona by since you left. Uy wife and I remember

i : 7 you often, more 60, becouse there are practically all new and som very serious | i

faces in the Embassy ((now))» I went to the reception on the Red Army Day, but —

Poe. . since I didn’t bave an invitation, they didnte let me in, even though CHERNYSH

i “and NECHIPORENKO tried to help mae Aa you see, my brother, times change. In

» our days, i.e. when you were here, everything was simpler and I would say even 7
“ gayere . , . : :
So
Well, enough of compleining. 111 now turn to the news, The most important i
e waiting for the oF : ,

news, at least for ma; is ‘chat Tega is expecting. We ar
It would be nice to have a son,

“Parisien package" approximately in Februarys

since ve are not going to produce more children. But 1£ it is a girl, that too

would be nice. I will feel as though Iam ina harem.
In 2-3 years ay wife and 1

1 am studying English and French seriously.
‘want to move to Spain. ‘I:have had enough of Mexico. 1 have been Living here 4 .
j

for 14 yearae On the other band, with the knowledge of langvages, one can eam | .
_ L

You know yourself that life 1s much happier in Europes

fain) as betcer Living ta spaine

Lase year 21 million tourists visited Spain. Ons can make a good living through

touriom, and without such difficulty.

I continua working tn the Institute. We bought 4 good lot on Rin Street

on a
Latest buile a three-story butldings Juan Lots's ulfe io also oxpecting their second :
childs ; :

o.
=> Please eutend ove big bello to your wife, ve remazber her often. You nave ,
boar .
a very atce and hind wifo. booking forward to/your aewo, we exdbroce yous

Halool Vidloys

ca . hy Flake rc 3 7 : en i *
. re jie . : t * . ‘
xn ... fe t . ofe “y if fF Poel }



--- Page 399 ---
ff ooo0

|

seine i tede

: ee tHe

2
Seb a te
2 wo

7
hee, re

: fife: Cie,"

leant ae yee

sf He Ze buetese, "Ga. oe.

iba, Gt Oe eifarefiiy ve ot
«fer oe -o0,

pt weet vteee wa mn, Le bt ney" LS sate

Co Lovee 6S
. _ eee OW te

wig

Beaty 2 ,
fou pire ey Wetiag a Met ree

§

CLIN ge Loti,

6 leceye ages COE ects a LREE LES pay le
. a . + . ~ a . cot a wt to

mat AE beh ote.

i Aiced FOC, a LG Te, Co

faye Met lece dee. tpt os
AG a 6 Ag Ate #0 ited once

POLL ge Sf

eee - of

Cttieey? Vig f iee i jig fu

Qrecia” ete nea ee
# _«

fetal, “ALCO.

eit det eee ta, Ae vhteg

AR eanefagin Ke da Lee one, Miia 2.
t poe wee, Dore nan, 2yeke Pé2e a we fool tre cs,

‘fo *. a 7 7
POC e eeeeen y A fact VEE DEAS E EEO bee <

“ . 7
OR Ate sen. . te ec oe ee bes
.
Phe AEG rad” Lf re" wig Thee,
era
a,
Ste C90 O,
: - r
> ' i
* ‘ :
4 :


--- Page 400 ---
e. <A ve ee peice |

Cag 2} ‘, ope etet .
“ae ¢ 7 Baeeeten PES Merle ede tt

wat * . . a . Z : ade . :
we MACE tee & Oy ¢ ee “ are 2, 26 aehee po a,

i diihe (Pra, Aile Cite

“eae. ; eabsye

!
t
L
i
i
i
t


--- Page 401 ---
: a Of 1 TRE yo . a
7 , : 7 - 4 : oe .
woe a | asec, tea SS.

—— a Ceep Meee bx en ae
se 7 . oS

| Manenepers se Co confan rae Dey a
Ls y Oe Keneynserica® Chiig ea . . Q : Bae
- oar a,  Aeumty e Berg eviarrsig, Le “ :
\ De POR AVION” q a

AIR MAIL

eee Oe

fe pe ee

ed


--- Page 402 ---
i
{
:
{
i

ce ier ttn tet

ae ROUTING AND. RECORD SHEET
TTR ae
E t TO: ACTION BRANCH. i

%. Fillim Sect. 2 om bach Detach back Mep
and forward-to IP/ADB.
2. Destroy troht cover sheet, untess it records

significant action taken or comments requir.

ing preservation.

MARUSO ILS
IP/AS
EXT. 6112 -

i if tile no and tutte shown are nal proces, °
" insert proper tle no. dDelow and forward
} document to IP/AN.

¥

FLL IN SECTION 1 ON BACK, IF APPROFRTATE

borane



--- Page 403 ---
ce | 458.
DISPATCH PR HR

_Chief, SB Division an

CUussuAnoA

SECRET

MARTIO HOS DDG

nO Lessin eQUIEID
ONLY QUALIFIED O8SK
CAN JUDGE INDLKING

Chief, European Division

Chief of Station, Bern (G) a.

REDTOP INBREED: Request for Photos and Bio Data
acto REQUIZ«D . REFERENCES .

Reference : ESBW-13096, 14 November 1972 .
: |

q —
1. As requested in Reference, Station queried INBREED as to
why they had included Valentin Sergeyovich LOGINOV (201-0285412)
in their list of Soviets who had been PNG'd or expelled from
various countries in the past five years. .

_ 2. In INBREED's reply to our query, they stated that in the
periodic "Das Beste" there was an extract from the Reader's Digest
of 1 January 1972,- of a booKutitled "Moscow's Attack on Mexice" by

John Barron, From this article it was learned that ‘the KGB cfficer
. LOGINOV met secretly with Mexican students at the time of the
student demonstrations in Mexico in 1968, In March 1971, when
five Soviet officvials were PNG'd from Mexico, it was believed that
Valentin Sergeyeévich LOGINOV was among those ousted,

. a)
°3. Upon learning that LOGINOV served in the Soviet Embassy
in Mexico City as Third Secretary/Vice Counsel from August 1965
to Octoher 1969, INBREED has now advised the Station that LOGINOV's
name a erroneously appeared in their list of Soviets who had

been PNG'd.

Lindt wu dehutiir’
Ronda W. SCHWEERS

Piste
=a.C/SB
3=C/EUR t&. faded tas/s . E2 IMPDET

24 ote

ES COPY
enn meen ET GPA HEN AND mest °
ESBA=21,494 i 20 December 1972

pein waite 13

creme nn semen semen NR {eal tol et)
SECRET i)
4 i eet ow tt



--- Page 404 ---
Yo 2

SECRET

LOGINOV, Valentin Sergeyevich . ;
Born: 23 December 1927, Moscow.
Wife: Aleksandra Dmitriyevna, born 20 August 1928, Moscow .

Children: Two : Lo a,
LOGINOV was an Attache at the § Soviet Embassy in

: Havana from September 1960 to Septender 1963. He was Third
: _ Secretary/Vice Consul at the Embassy in Mexico City from |
August 1965 to October 1969, replacing NECHIPORENKO, We
have no ‘information to indicate he has ever been expelled
from a country. He accompanied a Soviet soccer team on a
Latin American tour as escort and interpreter December 1961.

Languages: Fluent Spanish and poor English

Lips et ®
ASAY (36% E

: guthll

pies fd.


--- Page 405 ---
. SECRET

_ Chen Felted In)

EXTRACT AND CROSS REFEREKCE

DOCUMENT LOENTIFICATION

DOC. symp0L @ m0,” GATE OF DOC. FHL ClLassieicaTion OF REcoaD Cory

SOURCE INFORMATION

|
TEXT OF EXTRACT (Also olte doo. distribution, Dicacw. No., otc. - bf applicable)

“LOGENOV, VALENTIN :

- _ G68-C02~004/03

gen 008? SO £584-2G502A01
me ae 19 JAN 72

cit 2 a PS
‘occ 2
NAME APPEARS ON LIST FROM SWISS INTEL SERV
WHICH REQUESTS BIO OATA/PHOTOS OF SGVS PNGO
OR EXPELLED FROM VARIOUS COUNTRIES OURIAG
LAST FIVE YRS —-

R 7202032649 |

: Indfeate The Subdjoct, Project Or
, ; 201 File No. In Which Tats
Form Is To Be Filed.

SECRET



--- Page 406 ---
i
i
f
i
i

ECRET

SEC.
(when pitted Ba)

EXTRACT AND CROSS REFERENCE

_ DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION
DATE OF DOC. .

SOURCE INFORMATION :

Of info. EVALUATION

oare

ete. « 80 epplicadie)

TEXT OF EXTRACT (Also cite doe, dletcibution, Dieses. No..

LOGINOV, VALENTIN SERGEYEVICH
201-285412 200+005-042/02

: SEX M 008 ? OST =22819
OT APR 66

CIT uSSR STATE
acc 3R0 SECY , a
SOVIET EMBASSY

< MEXICO, MEXICO

{
731 oe R 71112305031

Indicate The Subject, Project Or
201 File No. In bhich Thts
Fors To To Bo Flied.

BUOsTCH OF 291 Chaet, Pires, Biegie)

VILE CLASSLPICATION OF AECORD COPY,

5 : : : i :
s : Fone zee emesieneeeememnengennecoeenenpeanee termes en ee EE

nen



--- Page 407 ---
14-0000

Uuok : ; ” .

sfcaet : were
WHEN FLED IN ear

s : ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET

ING THUG NOMS

1, Filkin Sect 2. on back. Detach back flap
and forward to RID
2. Destroy front coves aboet, unless it records
signibcant action taken or comments requit-
ing proservation.

If hle no. and ttle shown are not proper, :
insert proper tle av. below and forward
document to RID AN. . -

PROPER FUE NG

_TO: ALL ADORESSEES .
PILL IN SECTION 1 ON GACK, IF APPROPRIATE 7“
COMMENTS
to . .
; .
- — - j

cepnacnmeaeernmeme maaan ater samc pare Seba ec an atte aren aa

- omens Tae Fete

nip
sonst acs ED EERE IERIE, TIE BE TEE BEST eed “st 4
" CT aes ae * te gt ped
vasit : a, , ?
aye : Te aes ue ea 75S Ws .
Laarish signe ama cha oA 1 Lo eer mmm cease f


--- Page 408 ---
: Chief of Station, Mexico City J-
weR "RED

C Forwarding

Forwarded herewith is a completed PCQ in Spanish on

Valentin Sergeyevich LOGINOV. This PCQ was prepared by

AEMIDRIFF and was turned in on 6 August 1970. The

Station is. not vetaining & copy of this PCQ.

Gy. vi. wb f
g ace H. _FARMILANT

7

Attachment: | |
PCQ Form - b/w.

. ribution: |
- "@- Chief, SB,:w/att
- Chief, WH, /wo/att

oS copy

UNMA-393.25

SRCRET “901-288412



--- Page 409 ---
i
i

'. tray informacién sobre el sujeto? En otras palabres, personas con
cuestionario. oo

. Antes de completar el siguienta Cuestionsrio para svalvar .
ia Personalidad, s{rvase suplir la siguiente informecién acerca .
de s{ mismo: — . . ot :

’ Edad LEI saxo Wa Factoualidad LA.

Antecedentes sociales y culturales:

3Con qué frecuencia ha observado usted al sujetot
j oe Poon

"4 Cudndo observs por! dfltima vez al sujetot™

bod bil og, (223

" gQué tipo de contacto tiene usted con 17 (trato direstoy 2:
. .Fecepelones o”“fiestas en las embajadas, informantes,

" “nterrogatorie ée otros, etc.)

gFuede “usted suplir el nombre de alguna persona o los nombres a
de varius personas qué en su opinién estén capacitadas para suminiss / -

suficieate conociniento

para completar dl menos parte da esta

1

Die FSV

te ee ney viene



--- Page 410 ---
14-0000

yo}

CUESTIONRIO PARA EVAUUAR LA PERSONALT OW.

I. DESCRITC [0

. _ 2. . 0 Beresidn coneral (argue la ecseripeidén nds apre; faday
a 1.0 Viria, atiético, préctico, de fécil trate social
: (esmpechano)  ” : : : :
4 02- Viril, roousto, prdctico, cauto en su trato social)
{autoritario) ©. ok . . . -
. . . . Lt
ies 2.03 Blando y cfectivo pero socialmentea agradavle y apio .
4 (suena persona) : ; oe
Pe) Blando y afectivo, pero soctalnense, uate y taciturno
: (posible quejumbroso) Le OAK eed . !
405 Yeseulino, de aspecto agradable y profesional, wrial- — se tee oo |
mente pulido (ejecutivo) —_ :
2.06 Austero, preciso y sistemftico (trabajodor aplicado)
1.07 Educado, refinado, artfatico y socialmente pulido ‘
{ciploxitico)
4.08 sensible, intenso y ensinismado (tLpo artista Cm
profesor distraido) . i .,

Hinguna ae las: descripeiones ‘es adecuada. - .
Yo lo describirfa en la siguiente forma: ~ . . . :

24 ; : H

Vestidu (Nerque la descripeidn més apropiada) ot

Bien arreglado (eleyante) f. J

aimpio (pien cuidado) ~ ( rec peteler /. ~/
weuente (minucioso) f .

Euperi:ollado (remilgade) .

Indistinto (desgaroado) .

Peco arreglado (no acicalado)

Deseuidadc (indiferente) a



--- Page 411 ---
4.01.03

Mal pergetado (ajedo)
esalitads (chocante)
Modo de vestir

De acuerdo con sus antecedentes eulturales

Cosmopolita
Pasadc ce moda
Extrenaéo o dnico

Caoracterfsticas de la cabeza,

Medidas del erdneo:

De lado a lado » Ancho___ Promedio
Del frente hacia atrés - Ancho__ Promedio__‘Estrecko___
Frente: - , Ancha_v' f Promedio 1 Estrecha
Ojos: : Apartados __ Promedio \. /suntos_.
Cejas a) Arqueadas___Proxedio | Derechas
vb an Espesas ~"Pronedio Va  Escasas
c. : Antes ~"Bromedio “ P Bajas

"yay algo | de su cabeza o de la estructura do su cabera que

~ yequiera nenciéa especial? .

, Ceracterfsticas generales

Edad, peso, estatura: Au care [-
yQué edad tiene? f
Su edad aparente es © Mucho mds joven".

* yQué estatura tiene?

Estrecho

_——

Ne joven

Mis o menos la Bisma!, 1 A/ Mayor.

sicko Reyer

EP?

a

!

“|

|

i

)

|
a



--- Page 412 ---
1400000"

4.02.05

h.03 °
“lp, 0300,

~ -
4.01.04 yTiene apodo? : "st _ No a -
. _ En caso afirnativo, gle molesta que : . _
: lo Mamen por 41? . - Sf No.
4.01.05. . yResponde a un dimimtivo (suanito, : os
7 ... ‘Pepito, etc.)? ° bf Wo
5 + potaoe alguna steatets u etre saws” . - a

4.02
«4.02.08

“4.02.02
4.08503

"02.04 ue

: En caso afirmativo, desorfbala,

En ¢ caso ofixmativo, describa; -

distintivat

> Color ° Muy claro Claro Nediano 7.
Canoso o blanco Oscuro Muy oscuro

Onda Rizado ‘\/ Promedio___ Iacto

Cantidad . Espeso__ Promedio V Escaso
_. Mende OTe calvicie Calvo”

Cuidado _ - Bien cuidado Vv Reacio
Promedio Desgrefiado

yfoy algo poco corriente en su cabello o su Petnador

ML ee


--- Page 413 ---
Hla.

§.03.05 urdatales de los espejuelos —Gruesos | Promedio _ .

4 : Bifocales —
fp 4.03.04 — Satilo de los eepejuelos Armadura cruesa .
7 mo . ; ; : Sin armadura | pe
: ed ra _ Armadura cortienta7__\ Yt
to . eo Ee o . "  ‘Lentes de contacto.

F 4005005 -gMenen sia ; ojos alguna caracterfstica poco corriente ane moe
a . " vequiere. mencién eapectelt Ba caso ate

1. i
| . .
po hs 4603.06 40 quita &, os eapeJuclos mantras baat | 8f_Ro
7 : © h03.07 ‘aGestioula con 10s eopejueloe? a a
: 4.03.08 . " yoen alguna vas ‘apesuetoe oscures bajo _ / re
Le, 7 ; sx Vr...
MeO : Tas 24
: ae ‘ : :
, ox * Rubicundo : Qscuro Tostado
i ‘ oe 2 Claro “> Pattdo ec
i o a) con cicatrices "_arrugada Idea :
: ue “b) Con darba Blea afeitada — es
: ", Con bigote—— Sin afeitar Soe
: B,ob03 “‘Deseriba el tipo do bigote 0 de berber —_
So - |
i i we . : ~
i - 4004.04. Pelo 0 vello del Cuerpo (brates, piernas, pacho)
i — os a Bspeso “Medio Encasé :
i : “ “bokos 7 ~ ase le ven pelos ‘en la narizt - , in
P 4.04.06." Se le ven pelos en las orejast 1 Oy
i § :

h.0b.07 aTiene eu piel o el color de su ptel alguna particularidad
"poco contin? En caso afirmativo, descrfbala, .

ee,


--- Page 414 ---
af-oooo0

4.05 “Caras : !

i

4.05.01  Fxpresividad Expresiva__ Prozedio_ V tnexpresiva

Muy oxpraciva Muy inexpresiva

4.05.02 $4 la cara es expresiva, eo Natural Tensa,
4.05.03 , Si ls cara es inexpreaiva, eo Tranguile__ Completamente :

Bo oe . inexpresiva . _ r
4.05.04 , En general, sus reacciones faciales son :

‘Inapropiadaa Apropiadas : PA

4.05.05 qilay alguna caracter{stica poco condn en sus expresioaea
factales? Eu caso afixrmativo, descrfbala.

| in .
H :
4.06 Iabloss > j
| . 4.06.02 po’ " Salientes____ Fruneidos_/ / Pinos :
i . 7 Gruesoy Flojos . :
4.06.02 Sonrfe a) Eepontdnesnente__ De manera tense. :
. : Mecdnicamente “7 ——
. “b) Muy a menudo __ A menudo Como el... *.
: oo, promedio «Poco Nunca,
4.06.03. glo ba visto usted alguna vez sonrefr solo? st/no_
, 4.06.04 Si lo ha visto haceraa retratar | : a
| _ yPuede sonrefr cuando se lo piden? st_V no
40 se ve tieso a incdémodo? : Sf{__ No
4.06.05 Si no Lo ha visto hacerse retratar

~ yQué *4B0 « de fotograf{a cerca uated que preferirfa?
Serta Sonriente_V_ v

i
i
i
i
i
i
H
!
i

406.05 gTienen sus labics o su conrisa alguna caracterf{stica ft
‘ poce comin o llazativa? En caso afirmativo, descrftala,. = | i



--- Page 415 ---
‘ my

ios Gentes?

ord
4.07 Bientes / .

4.07. ol Yorca Regular, Pronedio \ . .
Loe Saliente  Desusada__ H
. |
4.07.02. itlene usted la impresidn da que aprieta po |

No if

. . . H
: {

En caso aftrnativo, sbajo cudles cfrcunstanciast

4.07.03”

tiene dtentes de oro 0 trabajo gants. poco ey i
— comint ; . Sf{__ No a, a
4.07.08 Cuando ‘sonrfe, : j
Lo gSe le ven los dientes? _st_\/ No 1
Fre ea los Labios?- ~ . st v | No a - , i
" g8@ tapa la boca con 1s nano? sf No: t
4.07.05 Al bablar, yse tapa la boca con la mano? eS 2
Nunca V/ Frequentencnte__ ; A veces_ Siempre we 3

ra

Blanco Vv Apagedo__

Promedio .V_ De haxbros estrechos

4.07.06 Matis de los dientes. . :
: . - > Manchado -
; 4.07.07 gTenen sus dientes alguna caracterfaticn poco comin o *
” . Jlusativa?  -
‘Ea caso afirnativo, descrivala: . ‘7 ; .
4.08 Porte
i 4.08.01 Derechura Ligeramente encorvado »__Vincorvado__
ao , . -Erecto___ ‘Meso . we,
4,038.02 Nantiene su postura  Constanterente No siempre. e
-_ i
4.08.03" Hombres  Ancho de houbros_/ De horsbros cafdoa nee 2


--- Page 416 ---
14-00

4Is

508.22

” Postura sentado

s+: S£ ea menos que la comén, (ge para . derecho para
: - avenirse al. _Erupo? ~

_ Manos:

/
Complexién _Flaca_s! & ’ Promedio____ Corpulenta

En conrersaciéa, ghacia ddndo so inclina principainente
con relaciéa a la otra persona? :

“".. Haede le otra__\* “En direceién opuesta

" De ninguna forma

go su posture mientras escucha diferente “de cuando
habla? .
Ea caso afirmativo, describa:

.) Reposada___ Fromedio__—s Tensa_
“) Erecta Promedio___ Desplomada

Estarse quieto

Cuondo est en un grupo, tiende a
" Meverse vin onder Recostarse 6 la’ pared.

Sentarse aun at otros estdin Parade,

Echerle el braze a otros \/

“- Si ay talla ea mis que la comin, ‘yse inclina para que “
_8u estatura se avenga més al grupo? — ‘Sf V Yo

$f_> —uo =

Ss tecctn pacts ce C42
Cuando asiate o una conferencia (o pleza dramditica o

pelfeula
) Se sienta quicto y mira al conferenciante.

_, Se meve en su asiento, parec: inquieto, candia do y postelén .

way alguna coracterfstica en su postura, porte o raneras que
requiera mencién especial? En caso afirmativo, deserfbala,

Mano dominante Derecka_\/ VA Izquierda_

f

aTignde @ vsar su Bano menos doninante? Freeventereate

Tae Rarozento__ A veces. lunca


--- Page 417 ---
14-0000

| 6

for
wanges “. Prone :
Grandes “- Yroredio .

. Peguetas Muy pequetas_. a 4]

-4.09.03  Terato de las Ba, 25

4.02.04 - Usa las manog Coa gracias Banera comin VV: . :
Torpencnie| . an
4,039.08 Norcolneate, cus brazos estda Sucltos__ Tlesos__ Prozedio-: ne
"4.09.05 De pic, heblando o escuchando, tiende a , : a
. ; Abrir y cerrar las manos / i on
Lo a  Nesorse las manos en los bolsilloa Van os Moy
_ + Pasarse la mano por lacaraoel * : .

cabello

"4.09.07 Cuando se mete Jas natios en les volsillos, tiene mayor
. : Aendencia & ponerlas ¢n .
El del pantalén’
El de la Chaqueta =e

4.09.03 UMas  Lingias, ain manicura Vi con mantcura
- Promeaio__ . Desiguales Suclas _ Merdidas

4.09.09 st tiene las uflas mordidas, yhasta qué grado?

Superfietal__ Promedio . Profuado -
4.09.10 ° Tiene .dedos Cortes Pronedio Largos V : ! |
4,09.11 Sus manos son . Callosas vy Asperas Pronedio . , “ pol
me, : : *  Lisas Suaves - wt
4.09.12 Enpiblico Se hala 2a usriz, se la frota, se ia hurgs a } : ‘ |

- On los dedos ‘ if
So, , ren : Se frota la muca oe a : ‘
: 7 Le - : "Se pasa la’nono por la cara o 1a boca
: 7 "ge rasea alguna parte del cuerpo

Se hala la ropa, a }
“

: nT - Nunca kace nada de esto . /
°  %.09.13  Pone los brazos en la mesa A menudo Avecea V ook
; ; : - Rarazente___ Nunca | i
4.09.14 Apoya los codos en la mesa A nemdo__ A veces _ Ve or : :
; moe ; * Rarazente Nunca : : mt
+ 4.09.25. Sentado a una mesa o escritario, habla | .o escucha con :
la cabeza en las manos A menudo “ST” A veces ; ;
. ' Rararente_ Nunca . rn



--- Page 418 ---
WP oy

; _ a - _
: . i . . boo. _
i : | 4.09.16 Mentras habla, tlerie a Cerra> sos osoe_ V :
oo “7 Ponerse la Eano, sobre los ojos . : -
oF ‘ A menudo A veces Rerazente___ Tunca__ _ :

% . 4.09.27 - se clerra o se cubre dos ojos, se inclira nis. a a hacerlo

i.e :

a . Cuando trata de explicar algo . .
i "Quando escucha a otra rersona . : ‘

4.09.18 easbortes en la mega.con los dedos? :
Menea_/ “A véeus A venudo an a

4.09.19: se inclina m4s a-hacer-esto cuando -
Habla Escucha_ Piensa

4.0.20 “Acostunbra -» Traquetear con las monedas en el boletito_

ery : ..  Suguetear con algdn odjeto ,

: oo . A menudo Algunas ve s
ve Rarazente Nunca

hea, uHay alguna caracter{stica en sus manos 0 brazos que requiera | Be
_-Rencién especial? En caso afirzativo, deserfbala, .

. 4.10-- . Ples we

_ 4.10.0. gtiende a usar ‘Brimero uno u otro ple?
: Izquierdo Derecho

420.02 ° Comtnando con ot, use esfuerza por ir al par?” Sf | No
& 10.03 .éCruza los ples ‘por os tobillos cuando se sienta? S£_N No

4.10.04 De ser asf,. eau Fie ve encima? Tequierdo >____ Derecho

4-20.05 Cruze das terms Solanente cuando’ canbia de orlentaciéa
_ fan pronto como se sienta _—
: _ Un rato después de sentarse

ae a . : : . "A Veces Nunca

- 4.10.06 Si sruza las ‘Piernas, qué pierra'va encina? la izquierda
: La derecha A -Depende de cdémo esté sentado

Sl WOOT Cambie 1a” ‘plexna que eruza?
Dependa de su ortentactéa relativa

con frecuencta_- / A veces. Nunca

. og

: Coase + seer ener eran gene ee



--- Page 419 ---
14-0000 J

\A gual velocidad =

poco nO va. al po eon eb ce usted, 210 nota y canbia.
. sf No
anon ee

cc want H
420.20 Ba convers sacién, cuando se ingeresa con’ “hae a .

a Desesuza las pierzas ¥ sc inclina hacia. eelante a
fee . Tescruza las piesnas y se inclina bacia atrés a
ea! : : (russ las piersas y se sieata derecho J an
os Plas . .Cazbia a una posiciés fi derechs : r TT, .
"s+. Gambia a una posicida ais repoceda een
Canbia poco de postet — i

Grandes prozedio___ __ Pequefios _ .

_ 20.0 “sus pies son
4,120.12 Ses zagatos son, .) Puntiagudes_ | Pronedio V Redondeados _ 2 :
~'b) May lustresog_j i Pronedio___ Mal cuidados___ a 3
7 : i.
fstica relscionada gon sus pies o piernds awe, : ae
Ea caso afirmsativo, descr ibaa. ae

i

_ HOS wey alguna earacter:
miexa atencién ecpecialt

Cuando tiene las piernas crucadas, 4
Se sienta quieto___ ave el pie_Y v | Neca 0 tueve la piersa ia)
4.10.35  Golvea el suelo con el pie? st. NO , 7 i

se mace sobre les pies czando esta paradd iv bablondo en un erupet
A menudo vo Raranente__
A verses mugea, : ;
—- Mainiemenereien -

4.10.27  Cuanio conina sud pasos, son Largos_y/ s/ promidio__ Cortos_,
4.20.28" Ceando camina, sus ‘brazos | Cueligait 3 puettes 2. — ;
. ge pecen de acuerdo con su pado_ Je

Se pecen, ‘pero fuera de tiexpo .
Se mantiexen ternsos . :

HL

Ce ae at a pretend ie bene 4,

4.10.16

©

4.10.19 Caxina con los pies .
: . : Hacia atucra_ pee el frente :
Hecia adentro Vv

wen Mies

10 ;


--- Page 420 ---
14-0000

la

4 "You: ' ~ ; .
AeLL.GL —--MHene tishre’ meh Promedio Altos
3 ° ; 4.12.02 Enable en voz maja_Y » Promedto__ Alta . :
too A-TL.03.- Ex-su lengua caterna su tono ge voz és notablemente - ri . .
DO . "Mis slto_ Mis bajo__—Ns. 0 peo to nisno_V

+ §.1L.0%  gTlene algin impedimento vocal? iq i) .
: ‘ ' En 480 afirzativo, descerfbalos oo ve 7

- Uso ded dian - an pote ee ee al ye

-
su ‘yoosbularta en L Lengua materna reyece sex.
Rico___ Limitado "" Promedio_i Pobre

ok, 12.02 Ea el. ‘t¢tona- “que mejor donina, ‘oparte ded naterno, tiene -
an "Plena fluides Escasa fluidez_
Bastante fluider_ V_ v ‘Ninguna fivides.

4.12.03 agrende ‘frases idiostticas “Pronto __
: Despacio__ Normalnente___ No las aprende WA

12.0% "Aprende lenguas, extronjeras con tectlidadt Sf___ No. J
* En caso afirmtivo,

- Aprende principalmente "de ofac* y y expertmentando__ . Dok

+. °] "+ Aprende prinefpalnente usando libros : co t

4.12.05 Coa res ecto a su mejor idioma extranjero, puede cambior ‘ta ;
su idiora nativo : an
Péodinecte y sin vactlacién : _
Eficlentenente y con vacilacidn. promedio
Despacio, con bastante vacilacién -
Torpenente y con bastanté tortedad

“422.96 Quando uso mol el 1¢ious, generaimente parece : oo

No darse cuenta

Darse cuenta pero con indiferencta
Darse cuenta, con inquietud

Darse cuenta, my ‘avergonzado_—

ee



--- Page 421 ---
14-00800
g

4
ad ~ . : . . =~ -
; 4.12.07 =a conerel, lo deserivirfa som / : cn re
. . . . ‘ a is
: . Lacénico Froncdio V Locuas - fog .
. — i
i 4.12.08 cn ccaversacisa ordinorta cl tena theade @ ser -“peimordialmente . - a Cee
bo: fersomal eon at nr
i < - : Imepersosal__¥ v Gaute we 3

7 , a 4.12.09 Ea conversaciéa ordinarta, cl contenido es°
: ; : Precico y a propéatte. _

! Anenee aa

7 a ee, . "A sropdotto pero eon asbages__
ee ase Teapropiado . re

——

Coe : . %.22.10°. Tiende uw Disoutir & menudo problenas personales
7 oo, ‘ . _ Roranenta discutir problenas Peraonaleg

isa Jenguage : s0ez en su idiom raterno? > :
En ocasiones V Frecuentenente____

_ Usa lenguaje, soez en un-idiora oprendidor _
|. En oeasioncs ave Frecuentendate,

4,12.13- gay alguia coracterfatica yoco comin en su manera de hablar o

.¢n su estilo de conversacidn?™ of No__ : g
! Ea caso afirnativo, descrfoola: . Coo _—
: i
i : estos, ; a ;
‘ . . oe wet
i Gestion, a hablar Skempre___ Algunas veces / .
: a

su geste t nda caractérfetico os Apunter con el dedo
ASitar una mano Vv
Barrer con las monos
Trozar coa las manda

12.

i
H
i


--- Page 422 ---
4.13.03 Cuand. gestiésla, sus sovinicntes ‘son }- a |
Kgraciados___ Prozedio__\ rwesatso_|

7. 4.13.0% Cuando so le habla, se pone tenso
: : A menudo Raranente__

_ A veces + Musca

raeunto daterminado .
. Siempre ; “Raranente
‘Algunas -veeds.__ Nunca_

35
aejhele seen ect mene & senatnentene 6+

§.13.05

_ Sus oie 8 gon aiy expresivos: ‘Siempre,
“Raranente,___

4.13.07 .La sayorta airfa que tiene ojos:
‘Hermosos Promedio _
Agradables__, Desagtadablea___ inte

"4.2308 Mantiene ‘contacto visual Siempre ‘a Frecuentensnte_| .
Ct “, Algunas veces___-Raramente_ Nunoa. |
4.13.09 Enun Exupo, glo ha visto clavar la vidta vepetidaneata Cn

uno persons que parece intoresarle?
A nenudo___ Algunas veces. WA Nunca___,

4,13.10° Cuando. admire (sigue con los aja) ®@ una muchacha atractiva, i

- . 20 hac : a :

: ‘Con desparpajo_ como edalquiera| —_ . “ay fa
Con disimalo_____- Nunéa lo he visto , : Se

REE TE PE RTE AE ep REE 4d]

"gle ba vieto usted sénrojarsat = - . stl Woo
Si su réspuesta es ofirmativa, déscriba. 2 attuactén: ; : a :

Aewidle flit a clas ae i

4.33.22 gHay edguna caracterfatiéa particulornente notable y que requicra
mayor explicacién velacioriada con los movinicatos ce su cuerpo,
ous ojos, y la forma en que se comporta en va grupo :

So Ba easo afirnativo, descrfbalai . .

ne



--- Page 423 ---
14-0000

“YQ

yo ~ o
Pa ; :
S.Ub 0” P4tVises de doruir . sre . ee an
Sy ‘ ; an i
WoN.Ol gle Cssta dornir y so cuorze ffeiizenter Sf s/ No. . ; ° : 24
guce © catina ea preparacida para coréir? Sf No. Te \

SVEE ffottouates
Weetlere quedarce en. cara basta el .
Vtino minster : .

4.14.03 aLe gusta |

4.15. Inprestonds : ;
4.25.01- De aeverdo con qo que conoce Ge ae eree que aa, nayorfa
fo @e las mujeres lo chcontrorfa - : .
i . oo Encantador__ ‘AgredabtaN_ a ‘Promedio__
Desagradable -_ Muy desgradadle

moe 4.15.02) De acierdo con sus coriocimieritos, erce usted que la. mente
: de los hozbres lo encontrarfa .
Encantador__ : _ Agradsble___ Promedio ‘a
Desagradable___. Muy: desagradabie

4.15.03 = Si holo conociera, usted y lo viera en la salle, lo
" califiearfa de .

Pipe indefinido Promedio Lianative Ve

4.15.04 sin conoeintento previo y ‘basdndose sdélo en su apariencia, lo -

torfarfa por
Cazpesino _ Dirtgenta

i . Obrero : " Profestonal

“a. . oo

i 7 , Comerciante Oficial Mlitar war VO

PS : Alpin tipo de artiota .

4.15.05. ulay alguna caracterfstica notable y que, requiera mayor
explicucida relactonada con la impresida general qua él aa?
En eas ofirnativo, sfrvase doseribirla,

ls



--- Page 424 ---
4
. . TI. ANIECEIENES ; :
Ss. Generales
$.02 _ Origen étaico: - ; Ts . - aT

"8.01.01 __- Sfvasa describir el origen étnico del aujetor

5.01.0 - A juzgar por otros del mismo cetgen, ae
et oe Como la wayorta
ft Personificacién del, "tipo"

Uferente a la nayerfa .

- . Deposible. para mf conccer su origen

5.02 Antecedentes culturales:
Si de 41 dependa, gcree usted que,‘ viviendo en una cultura

- 5.02001
. -extraiia :
"nunca conbfa su manera de vivir habitual? _
Bie: : Mantiene su manera de vivir habitual, pero - : .i

i : coe to. ” muestra aigiin interés en la costunbres locales? . a

: P : a . : Se interesa en las costumbres locales y se sO wee

| L Ts . adapta? a fof
a a woe i ". Si pucde, vive como los del pats? :
at . : i _—_— i 1
: ' .§,02,02 Déntro da su grupo es | , :

i ‘ a Como todos los otros :

co ge el vos. Algo diferente datos otros Vo
| i Lo oe EE

: 5.03 Edueacién. :

i S . 5.03.01. Qué ensetanea ba tenidot Deverinalas . :

i | pit eds 4 LE é. 4 an —_ oe

: poy f ASL Ae AZ iy eiele” ; a

i Hl
i . ,)
a _—



--- Page 425 ---
100000

124 .

O

§.03.07 aida, conzaredo ces 3 2a cayorfa de sus congéaeres ”

Ssene igual instrecetén: /
Est xeJjor trrormdo : .
Purece estar rejor instruide de 16 que dice

ee

No ‘puedo ereer que tenga le Lnstrucei¢a
gue dice |

Si duda do sus antecedentes, explfquese,

6. inpresi¢n general de sus antecedentes ‘(Marque la doseripetén

_ nda aproptada)
6.01 Fuerte ¥ Fobusto (“de pelo on Pecho") . : 7
6.02. Fuerte, robuste, pore independiente ‘(saliterio, _

: autosufictente)

6.03 Compasive, sensual Y¥ comprensivo (popular ¢on las mujeres)

6.05 Directo, inteligenta y responsable (profesional)

6.06 ° Diestro, dateligente e intenso (Scntce) -

eee

6.0) © Cazbiante, emotivo y a veces anargado (“tncomprondido") if
~~—

ee

6.07 Sensible, refinada ¥ mundano (que busea tmpresionar
con apariencias) .

Sensible, de cardcter voluble, fuera de lo corriente
“(boheiio) : ; So,

. ; —
6.09 Ninguna de estas cabo, . —__
. Yo lo describirfa asf; -

1. os ,



--- Page 426 ---
if
at
fd
-4
:

- —
TIT. CGQORTAIE: S100 SOCIAL 8

Imnresién General. (Marque lo nfo aproptads.)

El tipo de hoxbre que acostunbra ser puntual, tlonde a saludar
a todos coa senciliez y parece sentirse satisfecho consiga
wmiamo al entrar en una pieza. . ——

El ‘tipo de hombre que es siempre puntual, tiende a saludar.
@ todos con alguna cortedad y parece sentirse inegnodo al
entrar en uaa pieza, . —~

: EL tipo’ de hombre aya, puntualidad es. inprevistble, ttende
a'ser nuy célido y anigable con todos. sus conocidos y ‘da

" Eupresida de confienza, en s{ mismo al entrar en una pleza,

 El.tipo de hombre puntual cuando hace una cita pero que .
tiende a romper compromisos con cierta frecuencia, tiende..
@ saludor sdélo a los que ha conocido antes y es ‘un tanta *
retrafdo y huratio al entrar en una pieza. . a

El tipo de honbre que tiende a hacerse esperar pero es 1... :
cortés y atento cuando “‘Nega, tiende a ser preciso y i

" ¢orrecto al saludar a todos y puede dar una eran impre=. : 3
ate +

_sidn aL entrar en una pleza. :

El tipo de houbre muy puntual, qué tiende a ser muy

- formal en el saludo y las nds de las veces es rigido e

inflexible al entrar en una pieza.

El tipo de Kombre de Puntualidad imprevisible, que tiende. : :
" @ ser atrayente y pulido en su saludo a todos y tiene - Y Log
gran eplene social el entrar en una pleza. Vv. .if



--- Page 427 ---
~ 1
y . .
1.6 3 €e hemore que & menudo Llega suy tarde y no le’ : oat
4 . : ra, Que ticnde a ser breve y-brisco al saludar y . . ,
: - a veces éo la izpresi¢n de torzeza @l entrar en una pieza,
7.09 _Uinguna de las anteriores. Se : -
Yolo describirfa asf: 9% "
. 8 : Presentaciones:, . !
; Soe, _ 8.0L AL der ln mano - — Avanza hacia la otra persona ‘|.
: . i
: H Las rds-de las veces el otro tiene que avanzar - . ;
i j . . an
pode ° "8,02 AL dor la mano, eh. apretén es - . |
| . co . . . so Muy tuerte_V_ Promedio |
, _ Fuerte" Fogo |
Ingerceptible Nag
8.03 ” Al dor la ano Sacude la del otro so , | .
| aa _ Aprieta le del otro . af. ; i
| . . Ct Deja que el otro apriete " a
i . ; te it
{ 8.04 gHay algo en su manera de dar la mano que deba men- }
i elonarse? En caso afirmativo, descr{balo. . . . i’
! : . we . —— i
H : 3
j
i . 8.05." AL ser. presentade por primera vez De : Vv. a ;
: . “Miya al otro directanente en 168 ojos ?
i Inclina la cabeza hacia el que presenta ;
i pero se fisa en el Presentado i
t oo af
H Inclina la cabeza y no mira a nadie eG
} t + . . _ . 3
i . . i i $e
| 7 : ee : boa .
4 !
} an : . a Bey
18 i ! :
i
i
-_


--- Page 428 ---
Cuando oye un nombre por primera vez

ae

No aparenta esforsarse por recordarlo

Lo repite sl responder a la presentacién

Pide al qe lo presenta, que lo repita o
lo conAirse .

Pide al presentadé que lo repita

“$4 ge canblan tarjetas . .

Tee la tarjeta y la guards con cuidado

. Lee La tarjete-y le mete en el bolsilio
Cuidadosazente la guarda sin leerla .-
La mete en el bolsilio sin leerla

Cuando presenta a otros lo hace

- Con facilidad y donsire .
Con cierta cortedad o vactlacién

Con bastante torpeza

* Qué diferencia hay en su manera al ser presentado a

una mujer?
Ninguna__ “Ia normals Notable sf

Si se porta ée modo diferente, squé desertpetén ¢ es

~aplisable?
Usa’ axbas manes para estrechar la de ella ~

Se acerca mdfs al xesponder & la presentaciéa

Es nfs cerenonioso y Gistante
Es caluroso y efusivo
. Bs caluroso y eflsivo sho con les chicas
_, bonitas ~
. Es muy cortés y amable con mujeres de edad
Verfa segin la mijer
'. En tal caso, explique



--- Page 429 ---
~~ fants en nr tn ete nn rea,

}
i
:
i
{
Hl

8.12

8.22.

6.13

2.
9.02
9.02.02

9.02.02

“

_ AL say presentado aun mizero regular de persdénas
. . 7 . . . i

Dedica un momento a cada una '

Responde a cada presentacién rdpidonente J :

y espera la siguiente . .

Mira a ls Fersora siguiente casi-a la vez Re |
soluda a la que acaba de: conocer . .

Ea gence, dle parece @ usted persona que
Steapre secuerds un nonbre? . -
fime retentiva norzal? . : , _.
Recuerda nochres con difieulted?. =” wv:
Recuerda mostres muy mal?

ye ha pedido a usted alguna vez que vuelva a ‘Adontiftcar: a”
- una persona a quien ya usted le ba Fresentado

aonteriormente?
Hdbitos de fumar y comer -
udbite de tumor: a og
Diga si furs * Gye hefner
Cigarrillos _— Tabacos_ Pipa ‘
Por costumbre__* Por edstunbre. ' por costunbre
Aveces__-* A veces. - Aveces
Manca =—s—=(ité‘éUNcg ‘Wonca
geudnto fumat Mc  Promedto
” _ . pose oS



--- Page 430 ---
—_ ~

3 an "9.01.03 Diga ef usa su propio Encendedor Paquete de fdsforos

9.01.04  Diga si os el tipo de persona que ; : _
. . 4 Sicxpre pide lumbre
A menudo pide lumbre ©
. - . . Generalmeate tiene su Rropia Lo,
lumbre . ee
Hl , Siempre’ tiene su Bropia lumbre -
i : . —
i -, 9.01.05 - Diga si usa boquilla Con cigarrilles Con pipa
a oC . - oc. Shempre : ~ Slempre
7 Se A veees : A veces
: oe Nunca_ _ '  [Runea,
-: - 9.02.06 Degpunta los tabacos — Stenrre__| A veces__ con los
c an . . . aientes
9.01.07 . Diga si cuida la pips Minuetosenente Como todos

RO la cuida

9.02.08 AL encender un eigarrillo : fee
_ Baja visiblenente la cabeza y ahueca las manos. ‘ ;
Lo hace sin ceremonta lentras habla

9.01.09  . yLo ha visto usted retener un cigarrillo sin encender y. soe 4
Fo Sguarder una pause en la converésacidn para encendcrlo? Sf__ i
No

~ 9-01.11 alo ha visto usted retene¥ e: en ta boca un tabaco, una
pipa oun cdgarrilic sin encender? sf MN

°

9.0.12 Es fumador constante --«
- , Enciende un cigorritio con otro
Fuma hasta la colilla’y enseguida euciende otro
Siempre tiene encendido ua cigarrillo @unque no lo fume
mucho

“. 9.0.03 Pum’ Solamente después de las comidas
‘Solanente cuando alguien le ofrece cigarrillo
Entre el plato principal y el, postre cuando otros fuman

Nees emeemin cos anon YOR a PRED MLS, BIG ge

9.01.14  Manchas “de tabaco en los dedos Muy notables
. . . Visibles

- : : ‘Apenas visibles
“es . ce ., No tiene’



--- Page 431 ---
9.02.15

9.01.23

, Diga-et :

AL fumer

(a) Deja acunvlar -rucha contzaen el eigarrillo
Sacude la centza norcaiceate :
Presta extraordinaria atenciéa al cenicoro

(=) Bsa caer le cenica ca ls alfozura
Pone la mano ahuecada balo el cigarrillo
Siempre usa al cenicero we

—_—
—
AL opagar el cigarrillo, diga si . .
“  " ‘Usa el centcero con rachs ceremonial: _
Parece apagarlo fe mancra nertal. . :
Farece descuidade al apagsrlo -

fuss con visible fruicida
. Fura con placer normal
Fura por fumar, recdnicazenta

ona qué Ofrése lu=bre a otros

; go si ea pe
Stenpre _ Raras veces
Con frecvencta Nunca

Diga si es Persona que -
Cruza la pieza para brindsr lunbye a una dana
Brinda lumbre a una dena cone cualquiera lo harfa
Rara vez ofrece lutbre a una dana’

:

Que usted sepa, zha dejado de fuzar por notives de salud? -
. : . - st

' Diga sf le ha ofdo. decir que’ _— we

- Deberfa dejar de furn> Pero no puede”
. _ Ka tratado y no ha podids dejar de fumar
Diga si le ba ofdo decir que le molesta el olor de

. Tabacos_ == Pipa _. . Cigarrtlios -

Si nunca le ha ofdo rencionar ninguro de los tres :
iTienea sus hébitos de fumnr alguna particularidad que
requiera mencién o descripeiéa especial? En tal caso, -
aserfbala. . : .

: :

No...

TT teem ies ease ete ieee ty emery oy

mere


--- Page 432 ---
p00 »

‘ce

9.C2 Uddites .. ceser

™~

Como la xayorfa de sus colegas _ \

> "9.02.01 Enjsus hébitos de coner es
. i . Algo distints a la mayorfa de sus colecgas | i
i Notablezente distinto a la rayorfa de sus colegas —
. A
o 9.02.02, Cone en cantidad —_Abuadante procedio__Y v Pequeta
9.02.03 : EL becho de que tiene marcadas Freverenclas en el coser e6 :
: . Muy notable
* ’ . No muy notable” ——tY .
. sos : an Nada notable ;
9.02.04 : Come con , Se a Fruicién i .
_S co , Placer corriente w= i
. : »  Indiferencia : 3
9.02.08: Ea el comer ea Répido_ Pronedio. Vo ---- ‘Lento

Servirse de nuevo /

. 9.02.06 Gonerainonte tlende a
i \ Servirse del todo una solo vez :
| - . Dejax parte de lo que sce sirve :
H 9.02.07 : ' Diga si Explica la mucha falta que le hacen sua conidas’
>| . H . nativas .
| i Se interesa formalente en las comidas locales
; a Se interesa bastante | en las conidas nuevas 0 extrafas :
H ai :
i Tow . N
i 9.02.08 (a) No cone mientras : Hobla / Escucha
| (») BE cond miéntyas Esbla . Escucha
: 9.02.09 ‘Su ‘tendencia a adaptarse a los nodales a la mesa de la cente
i : “son quienes - cone .es Notable Pronedio —
t Ninguna; cone como siempre ha acostumbrado '
i edt
7 . 9.02.10 Daga la oportunidad, por motives no de negocios, sugtere va
Hy : -lpgar preforido para comer. Sieapre A veces '
t . Raras veces 0 nunca

Se le hace muy diffell escoger la conida

“9.0211 En el restaurante .
. Ecpora @ que cl otro pida y entonees pide lo mismo

“- : _ : : . Sienpre sabe rdpidascate lo que quiere v
hel 5 960282 = Enel L restaurante es ,
\ al , . Algo extravagante si sabe que usted va a
ca. on pagar . — oot
fossa. an Atento al precio si sabe que a ‘pismo va o rn re
an . _ “pagar . *
: . : ‘Atento al precio no inporta qui¢a vaya & pager © &
Tz i

Indiferente al precio no importa quiéa vaya o pagar

23 i _ oy

ae AER oan


--- Page 433 ---
14-0000

loa

oo

9.02.23

G.C2.14

9.02.28
9.02.16
9.02.17

~ . 9.02.18.

. ft

9.02.19 :

9.03.03

: sh no le place et servicio tiende a quejazse

gHay alguna caracterfstica en sus hdbitos de comer o en sus

dcacripcién nfo apropiada).

~y fuma con fruicién pero sus odales son definitivanente

-platos que 61 ha descubierto. Cone con visible placer, - : : :

ul <tpo ce persona. qu :
2 ogy 8 cGnpsotar la cuenta, no inpo"’S cutéa

ea

fe ocuye eo ia cuenta si otro va a pagar

jo €L paca, comyructa la cucnta -
Diseretancate hey éuidadosazente (y sin disimulo)

Csando 42 paga lo cuenta Cuenta el veelto sin dicimlo .

Nuestra indiferencia al aceptar ol vuelto :
ona, el vuelto de ‘manera nor=al WA :
Ss il
Ea su-trato coa el sere Ge camareros es Jgresivo . vee . ih
Normal y convencional Algo servil_ ss Bruseo . ~ :
. — ;
7 . “ee ” . ot i
!

iv

A su acompafiante___—dDirectamente, No s€ queja

rata a los camarcros Segin la costuxbre gencral. : wT
Con excesiva confianza * Con desugada cortesfa . a

Shee We baa nn neaoasoecnne

manoras que merezca mencida especial? De ser asf,’ descrivalar

Tr rer ted eee

Inpresién general de sus hdbitos do comer y fumar, , {Marque la

Porsona de enorme apetito y preferencias bien definidas,
Come y fura con. bastante fruicidn, pero tiende a ser un” ar
poco rifstico y tesco. Es fdecil imaginarlo comiendo grandes . - y
emparedados y tomando cerveza con sus. anigotes ca da taberna . .

del barrio.

Persona de enorme apetito y preferencias Limitades. Come .

toscos y rdsticos. Es fdcil imaginar su aspereza. con el ,
caskirero que le sirve conida extrafla o preparada de rancra ne

desucoda. . . . ;

Persona de comer sensual que conoce todos los restaurantes :
y sus especfolidades. Se empefia en que otros rrueben los ..

caborea sus cigarrillos, y aunque raranente se cuestra tosco, a a
se preocupa mds ce su comida gue de sus rodales, Es fdcil oan :
inacinarlo cocinando y sirviendo plates especiales a sus

anigos. :

ah.



--- Page 434 ---
} 439

9.03.04 \
9-03.05

9.03.06 ,

9.03.07

Percora co comer semsucl que tfende a ccser solo si puede.
Tarece ccher de todo y tiene clerto aire de giot ma. Cone
econ visible fruieidn, sasorea sus elgarrillos y lego se
gueda a la mesa solo, regodeéndose. Es fdcil inaginarlo
solo rorndéando la mesa de los docadillos en un cdetel, .

goléstneanio,

’ Persona de comer rutinario que gencralmente hace lo que los

denda. Trobablemente pacece’ de alergius que le irpicen
comer ciertos alimentos. Da la iupresisa de gustarle nda

fumar.que comer, pere-sua-nodales @ la nesa.se adepton a
éualquier situacién. Es fdcil imaginarlo tozando. pastilles

. digestivas en su cuarto.’

Persona de concer rutinorio que generalrente hace lo que |
los demfs. Come con algin desgano y raras veces habla

de lo que ie gusta o-no le gusta. Fuma cada vez que’
puede, pero mds mecdnicanente que con fruicidn, Por lo .
General trata de adaptar sus modales a la situacida pero |
posiblemente con alguna torpeza y sin disimulo. Es fdcil
imaginarloe comiendo-algo a.la. carrera en algin ‘Pussto
callejero 8. cualquier | hora. forte tive ee

Gastrénono “euyo refinamtento en el comer as pronunciado y
extenso. Ala mesa es muy ritualista y para ¢1.¢l ex=bicnte

y el servicio son casi tan importantes como la comida. Es

agraciado y culto a la mesa asf como al fumr. £3 fécil
imaginarlo cambiar de ropa para comer y disfrutar buen
vino y finos platos a la luz de candeleros,

Persona de comer desusado, diminuto. Come de rodo preocue
pado, indiferente a la comida y & lo que le rodea., fo
serfa sorprendente que tuvicre manfas “gastrondsicas. (go
vegetarian, de férmules especiales, ete. ).

Nada de esto cabe.
Yo lo describirfa asf:

a4

;


--- Page 435 ---
9.04.08

9.04.05

9.04.06

"9.08.07
9.04.08

9.04.09

9.04.10

; 902.2

Seites de beter : a

Nunca, Prozedio
Poco ducko

zeke + Sole \ essa solitario)
Con otros fayorzente por ser antgable
En ocasidn de cerezoata
-Despuds del trabajo, en casa

ms

fiat

Porece beber’  —'Princindizente por el gusto
: : Principalnsate por el efecto
. Por axbos

Preftere beber cerveza__| vino Waiskey-_-'\/

: : / Vodka Ginobra No tiene preferencia ;
Prefiecre : Céctelas Jétbols 3 V_ Licor cast pure, .
ne Tragos ‘sin mezela —.
Bebe Despactd___ _ Normalnente iY ! Rapido a
Bebe: . De un tres Agordos 01). :
Doopude de lo primera bobida - . . _

Se expefia en conseguir ia seguads °
Acostuzbra ¢sperar a que le ofrescan otra YZ
Siempre espera a que le ofrezcan otra . :
_ En cuanto a vinos , £s uy entendido . -
La gustan pero no ea muy entendido TV | *
Le son indiferentes —
, Ni los eonoce’ ni le importa

En cuanto a sus preferencias en la bebida
tas explica en dotalle (y con gran conplacedcta)

.No Hatla de ellas nis de lo corriente van
: Nunca habla de ellas” :
En cuanto a las bebidas do su tierra natal ;
- Se enorgullece francamente de ellas ¢ snitte sta |
_ 4 probarlas? - No
plas tiene en cuenta norcalnente y las earees / ‘
si corresponde? No”
gias rereiora raras veces, sin insistir en | : jo
hacerlas Frobar?, 4 No. if



--- Page 436 ---
NES AREER DE ALAR, SBN

9.04.12

9.04.13 .

9.04.15

9.04.04

9.04.16 "Cuando bebe, su-tono de you

9.017

iS occupa ‘poco de si. beben o no los dexds?

eTlende @ obligar.a otros a dedert

En conparactén con sus colegas, 40600 son sus hdbitos en :

cuanto 4 la bebida? -

. En extremo diferentes Muy parecidos . a
Wa oO menos loa nismos_. | a .
$1 son en extreno diferentes, sfrvase explicer: . _ .

Cuando" ha empinado varias veces, su comportantento

No canbia visiblemente
Cambia algo
Canbia de veras ..

St conbia de veras, sf{rvase deseribirlo;

Cuando bebe . , Se como las palabras
tet Habla casi normalnente
Eabla como siempra

Se eleva __ Se suaviza . No canbia _

plo ha visto usted alguna vez ebrio de veras? st no

En tal caso, sc nostraba
.. Socidlmente activo, a _ Con dontnto propio
. Ruidoso — " Poco coordinado
Hostil . Deprinido
Tranquilo, retrafdo Sexualnente excitado ies Ly

“eSirve la bebida de modo socialzente apropiado? * mwa

1

seg tee pteee eeee



--- Page 437 ---
Y ne

Y

9.04.13 Si nt lo la vist edrio, asec ue gue en estado & esicfagues ~
sea pondrts, : : . .
Roy active Yay pasive
easesracable. Bastante acratsble

nea se emborracka,
No &e imagizo cdzo actuarfa si se

9.C4.19 Dicga si lo ba visto al dfa siguiente de una borrachera, =
: En caso efirnativo diga si es un tipo que Sines sf —_Y .
Deja ver los efectos peso fincions bastante bien ,

Deja ver un poco les efedtes,” pero mayornente ea los odes .
y su comportemtieato gener eral . aE EEEEeee

_ Deja-ver los efectos y-se ges macho del zalestar we

: @ue siente :
. No se ve ral,- aga 16 gue diga

9.04.20 giay algo especial en sus -hdoitos. de bebdex que requiere
mencidn? De ser asf, sfrvase deseribirlo:

“npresidi general como bebedor (sefale la nts apcopieda): =~. in

"'Bebedor expansivo y en cdntidad a quien no ‘afecta ‘eucho cl |
licor. Siexore-es muy bulLicioso y al beber caraia poco,

Bebedor ‘en cantidad que a remudo da la impresida de poder,

beber xfs que nadie. ‘Cuando bebe canbia pocd de conducta

‘perxo ‘se trasluce gue si se le provoca se puede poner muy ©
violento, oo,

“Bobédor constante a quien se ve que le gusta estar achis«
pado. En cierto rodo es algo simpdtico cuando lo estd y
puede ser le diversion principal en una festa,

Bebedor constente que se pone un poco mis: sensiblero ‘cuando .

> se “ackispa o extriaga, lende a dectr a otros lo sixpf-— co.
ticos que le son y a veces les pregunta si lo hallan sim .
pitico. Da la tnpresida de poder becerse muy repulsivo si-
se pons muy deodo.

y

a . . _



--- Page 438 ---
1400009,

al

20,

9.08.05

9.05.06

9.08.07 |

9408.08

9.05.09

10.01

10.02.01

Siexpre conserva muy dfea su eicnidad y generaizente
rantiene su aplomo aun cuando otros estdéa pontéadose
muy ebrios. Sin ezvarco, no se afsla del Grupo, o

sea que da s poco indicio de desagrado 2 aburriniento, :

Tebedor constante ‘a Gelen afecta muy poco el licor. |

“ Bebedor Parco que espacfa los tragns. Parece beber |
s6lo por imperativo social. Scegin adelanta la fiesta. ,
se va pontendéo reservado y distante. No'es cxtratio: § |
“que siga hablando de su trabajo aunque no venga a4
cuento, — :

|

q

'

i

i

Bebedor parco que bede menos y renos segin pasan ‘las: . |
- horas. Generalmente consigue mantener una reserva de | we

horbre dé mundo para con los dends.. A menudo se; a el:

‘

. ¢mpareja con alguno que se le porezca, Seen ~ \
. transcurre Ja fiesta demuestra franco desagrado por
"todo lo que crea burdo o ruidoso. A menudo critica
con sarcasmo 1a conducta de otros. . we
ei i:
Bebedor muy pareo que 9 bicn bebe por compromise. é:se niega
a bever. Generalzente no form parte realmente del grupo
festejante y se ve que le molesta que lo hayan trafdo :
contra su voluntad. Tiende acstar solo y en la primera

oportunidad se escabulle. oo —_ _

Ninguna de las anteriores deccrtfetone le cuadra,’ “Yo :
lo describirfa asf; :
Tidoitos de Conducir y ce Coninor f

Idbitos de conducir: : ot oa

Como conductor de autonsvi Es inusitadanente diestro . :
Tiene destreza promedio ve. :
. . lene desusada falta de destreza
ue No cuenta, pues no conduce !



--- Page 439 ---
F-00000

26.03.02 Conéuce a veloctasd Muy clita Pronedio 4 Muy ba J
20.01.03 Mieatras cozduce y conversa, ca la izpresidz de que

Presta poca atencién al manejo
Presta atencida promedio al rane jo
Sin ctda le parece ngs ix: ortanve conducir que conversar

10.02.04 Coxparade con sus colegas, su interés en autos
izportados es . .
. : ao ; . Ms o menos el nisko -
_ Lo - ; . “Muy diferente
10.01.05 Sib dnterés en el extdado y la reparacidn de autes es |
“- --- .°* Tausitado'-- Promedio’ . NI “Poco o-ninguno

10.02.08 . Su cortesfa coxa conductor es

Coma ia de la GCneralidad de sus colegas
Como la de la generalidad da la gente que usted
conoce : a .
Fuera de lo xorzal vor lo cortés ¥ cautelosa
Fuera de lo norzal por lo burda y exigente

1O.QL.07- Por lo qgie a usted le consta, es el tipo de persona que .

_ Se fenilisrica muy pronto en una ciudad extrata
Usa bastante bien ua capa de.caminos ° croguis urbano
Sé les srregla haciendo muchas preguntas

Casi siempre depende ée Que otros lo gufen a donde va

10.02.08 -  Cozo Pasajero, yes persona uy consciente ée la tarea
del conductor y reacciona al par con dste (o sea, hace
come que aplica los frenos, se adapta en sy esiento.a

los carbdios en el trdsico, ete.)? t_N/ ost —_——

"10.02.09 : Cone pase Jero, 2es persona que parece adaptarse al
: modo de conducir de. ~

corziente o apropiaca? Eo sf sy |

ke)

gue va al tindn, de manora oops

Ve et ne le ay pte os



--- Page 440 ---
,
: -
; 10.01.10 Coxe pasajero en un autorévil, zee persons que permancee
pee et muy ca calna y relativencate indiferente @ la mancra de
: Pancjer del conductor? : Ko. se Vv

ple '10;02.21. -Ea:persona que
4 Ll Nanca conducirfa nlentras bebo
Tiende a sabcr cudndo no debe conducir
- Siexpra snaistir’ fa en conducir, aun estando ebrio- v
‘10.01.12 | Ofrece llevar pasajero (Cuando ‘es apropiado . ; ‘

Casi siempre —~ ‘Musca

10.01.13 - Hay algo eobre. su manera.de conducir que deba Eenefonarse?
. De ser asf, deserftalo;

{
|
i

a 10.02 —-Hifbitos al. caminar
So, _ | 10.02.08 Es la clase dé persona que Comina mucho Vi ;
an . i . Camina lo mismo que la mayorfa * :
i Nunca camina si puede ‘evitarlo i
10.02.02 Cuando cent, su paso es Rdpido _ Promedio_\V Ni Lento ok
B+ 10.02.03." Cuands usted camina con 41, usualmente - laf
: : : i . Camina al paso suyo ‘ iv ob
a . Odbliga a usted | a caminar al paso toy
f de ——_
i 10,0208 Cuando cantina mueve dos pies ‘ ; De,
H . ao . i A derecho o sequterda (hacia afuera) - ;
: ae "Nfs o menos paralelos © a "Oe
! Hacia adentro Z. H
i — :
! : 10.02.05 - Brecto con cabeza alta” fi:
pot . : Erecto con cabeza agachada . :
ee . Lo Agackado pero con ios ojos en clto :
: : - : Muy agackado — .
: : 10.02.06 cuendo coming nira alrededor . yt
: . Mucho____ De manera normal J Manca, a
10.02.07 : Cuando salud @ alguisa que conoce en ia ealle*su cora ;

Se flurtca a
Moestra expresién normal 0 i aloe
Rarasenate caxzbia de expresica

a a



--- Page 441 ---
en 7 . : , ry
. 7, 40.02.08 isey algo L. tive o pose usual en su paso c-Jarera de
. geet ES Caso afizuativo, deserfoalo: . . : .
Vie, }
Lo 210,03 Dorseri¢a gvccrsk ds suc bédttrs ol ceaXcir 2 santaar: ; |
(sargue la des: sepsis Is ‘Bs apropiada) . i
10.03.01 “Entividuo active | y Cesplerto de paso resuelto. que parece . :
. tener una mente muy prdética, Le gusta reparar cosas, ~ . : . .
- parece tener buen conocitiento de autendviles y conduce Le ;
Ge ranera calzada y eficiente. . . 7 “4
10.03.02 Tetivideo active que es algo retraféo (o negativo). con a

- les dexds. Su paso es rapido y resvelto, Parece tener
una mente prdstica, es muy celoso de lo que posca y lo.
protege con exceso y no le custa compertirlo, Repara

. . fi _ ¢osa5 Sin alarde, parece tencr buen en eoaveintento de

. autondviles y conduce de manera resuelta (a veces hostil)

, pee eficiente, se memanee |

10.03.03 Tadividuo activo ¥ aesplerto de paso Gespreocupade, que . .
parece estar de buen humor la mayorfa eel tempo. Cast ‘ on
nunca trata de arreglar cosa3 pero a menudo es muy diestro . Oo
en hacer que se las atreglen. Parece tener poco conociniento
de sutonéviles pera conduce de manera eslmada y eficicate,

i
1
t

10.03.04 Individue active ave canina algo cautelosanente, como
que es ffeil abochorzorlo o sorprenderlo. Pareca algo
inéefenso y lerdo cuando tien que rerarar algo. Evidens
temente tiene poco conocintento de autendéviles y conduce
de manera cuidagesa (a veces tease) pero eficiente. -

; 10.03.05 | ‘Incividuo duetio de sf mismo y atento que camina de mancra :
es . O159 cortada y forsal. Aunque en §Senerel es individuo
, Log the . , prdctico, casi nunea trata de hacer asda a ciegas, Tiene
que Leer las instrucciones y prepararsé antes de reparar .
ois. Perece haber adquirido bastantes conocimientes
sobre autccdviles, pero conduce Ge manera algo mecdnica

, y my controlada.. we .

|
H
!
!
7
H
i
}
i
i
4
i
t
|
!
}
i
!
!
i
i
{
i
i
|
i
i
}

cee cee cine ee einer oe tena enneetenee cae

10.03.06 Tadtvideo dueto de sf miszo que a menudo esta ‘ago

: . Feecenpado hasta al coninar. Cuando se tesa el tiempo
i: : . ; .. @8 Feporar algo lo hace intensanente y con precisidn,
H : . . ‘A mecido sebe rucho de automiviles y culda el suyo o se
: “ocupa de que lo cuiden ceticulosarenta., Sin exborgo, |

i
i
i
i
i

i .
: a cussdd estf en conversaciéa o Preoscupaze cog algo, 4
oa pucce & veces ser co=ductor muy peligroso, Vv. :
/

Ro,



--- Page 442 ---
\

10.03.07 - Individuo duetio. da ef miéxo que camina con soltura y
oracia, Tiene poco o ningin interds en arroglar cosas
of. . pero ceneralmente conoca los rejores lugares en que
encorgar trabajos y ticnde a ser muy exigente en cuanto
Ol trabajo que se le hace. Parece tener relativazente.
poco conociniento dél funcionariento de un autonsvil,
pero aprecia y cuida bien de uno bueno. Conduce con
confianza pero gencralnente a velocidad y sia dorse

‘mucha cuenta de otros.

10.03.08 - - Persona. bastante nerviosa y temperamental que conina
. “ p@pida y torpenente,. Tiene poco o ningiin intesds en
an oe saber reparar cosas y s@ inclina a ignorar o botar las
cosas que no trabajan bien. Porece interesarse poco y..’
tener poco conocimtento de automdviles ysu cancra de. _
_ conducir lo demuestra. A veces espanta toner que viojor
con 61 de conductor. a v

.

_ 10.03.09 - - Minguna de estas . deseripctones cabe.
—— Yo lo describirfa como sigue: :

10.04 : Entretentmtentos, deportes

j ‘10.04.08 yTiene el- alguna ocupacién favorita? sf as No sé

: , a Bu Teapueste | es afizpative, deseriba , Bus ocupaciones

i favorites: : : . oo
7 . .

} . : Ye Tepe nt Co dnd vs

i . ae,

Si su respuesta es "Ifo" 0 "No sd" gcudl eree usted que
serfa la ocupacidn que le interesarfa mist :

Yo puedo inagintrnelo con alguna ocupacida favorita



--- Page 443 ---
14-00000

na Actividades

Colecctorista (:oud coleccitons? Armas da fuego,
ronedas, libros, tariposas, ete.)

Pestrezas (corpinterd
storia, filosoffa, etc.) :

baile ca grupos, deportes ligeros como i
. ‘el ping-pohs, juego de boles © volivol) A
: Deportes al airdTibre (caza, peaca, golf, ete.) Ung 7
_ Juegos sociales (ajedroz, poxer, bridge, otc.) WA
_ Espectador (ofr mfsica, asiotir a obras de teatro,
& jucgos de pelota, etc.)
Distraceida meatal (crucigrazas, onagramas, crip-
tograzas, ete.)

“! {oma colecciomsta es &Avido De nedtano .
tnterds V Despreocupado. a

fetes (Pintura, ‘eordztes, etc.) . Ve
Mecdnico (motores, equipo tonosrdf'ico, etc.) OS

a, construccién de odelos, etc.) Cougs

‘Intelectual fee

ya mencionado 4], alguna vez haber tenido ocupaciones
bL_.

10.04.02
¢ favoritas en el pasado? No
En caso ) afimativo, sirvase dar detalles:
ign Vag ed fob fr be 7 -
"10.04.03 10600" atid? Extrenadazente bied he _V tormalmenta
. Mal Ko baila ;
10.04.04 Desgcriba 1a clase de bailes que le ha visto ejecutar,

CEP AER ET ET

EIN ng oe oT,

ete

SDs ATER Pao As BR,

oo

E

ROSIN SER RR Cts Ba OC a



--- Page 444 ---
10.04.05 peer ajedrez? si” Vi xo
. . : oh surespuesta es afizmative, yso abe usted oi jucga \ega bien?
. geree usted que procaolenente Jueca bien?
a Chea gsade usted que jucca Eediansoente?
. . qerea usted. que procadlemcate jucga nediansrente? .
ysave usted que juega mil? :
qeree usted quo probablemente uega pal?

Il i

SL-usted sabe jugar poker, et la clase do Shendor da.

.10.04.06
poker que. cree que a seria: :

.

10.04.07 . ys la clase de persons coa . quien Ye gustarta a usted jugar
poker? st Yolo

Si su respuesta es negativa, explique por qué:

fl

10.0408 gle ha ofao usted cantar? , sf_,; No
En caso afizmativo, es su voz . Buena Promedio *" Mala

10.04.09 _ gParece saber muchas canciones?. -“ ° . $f ‘y “No : -

10.04.10 Cantando en grupo,

10.04.22 | ‘,foca algin instrumento musical?
: -En caso afirmative, zqué Lastrumento? : ,

i ae : - "20.04.22 gia nencionado alguna. vez haber tocado , atgin ingtruncnte? /-
i . — . . Ss:

/. Ea caso afirmativo, sfzvase dar detalles: °

10.04.13 uPractica algdn deporte activo?

GAL h, i Ey

a

Haan ,



--- Page 445 ---
10.08.14

10.04.15

10.04.16

40.04.27

10.05.19

10.04.28 ;

. ot cu respuesta ¢3 aersative, waud clase de ccportes cree : .
usted gue le interesarfa nfs?

Ho es tipo para geportes | :

Be custzete Lfsico. (Aktde1, rupdy, sdccer, etc.)

De destreza = (tenis, talén de mano, volibol, etc.)

De-cestreza, individual (natacidn, tiro de flechas,
tiro de pichones, etc.)

Puede que le interese todo

Juega cof? . -Sf_ No .
En caso afirnativo, ylo tom: my serianente? : i

glo toma de manera norzal?
glo toma con indiferencia? ~ =~ © - 6S om

Como jugador de golf, ysabe usted que juega bien?
gCree que probablemente juega bien? : gSabe
que jucga medianorente? Cree que Brobablenente
juega mediananente?_ yoabe que juega nal?
yCree que probableneate juega mal? .

I

SL usted juega golf, tes 1 la clase de persona con quien
le gustarfa a usted jugar? - Sf" No.
En caso negativo, explique por qué: ,

Diga si Caza mucho’ __—s- Pesca mucho _ Caza wveces, Town. .
Pesca a veces Nunca caza
, Manca va de pesca

ySabe usted si tona las otupaciones de cazar x pescar Serta-
nente? Sf an

En “caso afirnativo, explique:

gia cencionado alguna vez haber prectteada deportes en 6.
pasado?
En caso afircativo, sfrvase dar detalles (incluya cxelauier a
referencia que el pueda haber hecho a nedallas, trofeos, : —
participacién en elgin equipo, _ : .

Ions Cene TE BE, ycide L004 of ,
4 Lp itee ae ee, Y LE (gee a
2 ; oy Miho CL. SHS .f



--- Page 446 ---
10.04.23
10.04. oh

10.04.25

. Christian Science Monitor

Ha ofdo usted a alguien describizio como atletat . _
St” Ko
En caso afirzativo, sirvase dar detalles; :

Digs si es persona que Se occupa micho de mantenerse J :
en buenas condiciones ffLsicas . ,

Trata ‘bastante de manienerse en buenss condiciones

Sé¢ interesa . poco en mantenerse en buexss condiciones

—_—
—es
—

ia thdtcsdo o alguna vez tener interés ea levantar peiast?

En caso afirmativo, sfrvase explicar: . sf__ wm v

Diga si es tipo més bien Mrseuloso y atldtico an
Fuerte, ce buena constitucida va .
Algo fofo : OE

Fofo y nada atl¢tico
Afeminado

‘gTiene inclinacidéa a la mecdnicar

En caso atirnativo, diga si .
Preficre seguir instrucciones de los libros
No se ocupa de las instrucciones y trata de
orreglérselas por si n{sxo

Si fuera posible suministrarle revistas y publicaciones

ec FE.UU., zcudles. de las siguientes cree que le gustarfan
realnente? .

El tev York Tines Saturday Review | Newsweek | .
Playboy. i/ Sports Tllustrated Lite. Atiantic .
Ficld and Strean Populor Meckentes Rew Republic oe
Detter Homes and Gardens Readers Digest (Selecetones)~ 7 -
Kenyon Review. Razports Scientific Anerican_, .

No puedo imagindrnelo leyendo una revista de EZ.WU.


--- Page 447 ---
i

i

i

i.

i

|
of

'

\

i

- 10,058.26

é Sr0s le ha offo nencfonar haber lefdo con placer,
Sa © Eensionuds BLSsa92

é relieules le ka
excionado algucat

© rencionar haber visto coa Placer,

10.04.28 St 41 pedtera escoger, probablexente tea
7 "Al efne AL teatro __ AL ballet »” A un partido .
ee séecer__- _ A uns corrdda de toros 3 «A ta concierto

10.05 © Comportamtento en la oficina
10.05.01 - Inforactéa general, (argue: to aplieable)
“De trato Pdet1 Encarga su trabajo a otros
Formal - No puede encargar a otros ~
-- Atento al Productivo _
“ reglanento 777 tT 0 Pensador
Innovedor Organi zado —~
Actuador - - Desorgani zado :
Prdctico Piensa que no le
. Dilatador . . aprecian su trabajo
Adicto a los . 2
rmenorindums Y

10.05.02. Reactidn de otros trabsjadores;

Subalternos
io estinan
fo lo estinan
- Es cortés con ellos
- Se . preocupa por ellos
mye No sé ocupa para nada
: Le tenea
Lo consideran .
Se attibuye el trabajo que ellos
.. ban hecho. .
. Reconoce nérito en justicia -
Lo trazan socialmente .

HI}

WINES

Kel KIL lee

HL TE

eet oe

ST Ae re termey eee,

‘

7
BY
“t



--- Page 448 ---
1400000

\

\
i

bu trato hacia las mujeres es ¥ds 0 menos el mismo que

- ate ha visto usted alguna vez enfadarse? “wo vf. st

Supericres
Contfan ea su ézicerio
Le estinan
No lo estinan
Le encargs2 vesporsalilidad
Lo. tratan sociainente .

ld kl
HUT

TV. CONSTITUCION EOCIOMAL = :

Temmerazento ¥ bunorisne . : , : we

‘Temperanento:
En su trate con otros usted lo considera [inico
: : . Cauto
Convencional y correcto
_ Anistoso rvs
cMido

. Su estilo de conversacidn es Poco diestro__ Confiado vee
: . : Vacilante Faeil J td
Artificioso Convencional Voluble : Me

" pacia los houbres .
nda correcto y controlado que hacia los hombres
_

M4s edlido y Tdcil.que Hacka los hombres .

, En general, diga si cree que es persona qué : ;

Se enfada fdeilmente . :
Puede onfadarse idcilnente, pero Se controla ne: t

TLene genio normal ., , _—— ;

Tiene buen genio y s¢ altera reranente 7

Es en extremo tolerante y casi munca s¢ enfadarfo

,

é
En caso afixnativo, describa brevencnte el iacidente,

incluyendo la reaceién de él: |



--- Page 449 ---
12.¢2

11.62.02.

” 11.02.02

- “2302.03

~ 12.02,04
12.02.08

12.02.06

zetetobag
NO Se puede fraginar que brosee con otro
cisicera rortal en cuanto a custarle brorear

13%0 bre: con otro . _ YW.

Ste noterfazente no tolera las broma’s - - te n
Con guiea a la mayorfa le Gusta bronear . AN
Con qtien a la myorfa nunca. se le ocurrirfa bromear :
A qvien ¢loranente ‘le gusta ser objeto de bromas

Sy- sentido del bunor es ¥4s 0 menos como el do la
. mayorfa :
Tiotablemente ausente Avispado

Suti1_ Seco Tosco Burdo

Cuenta chistes y anécdotas Hunca A veces *
. Frecuentenente

Eacienéo cuentos es == Muy bueno Pronedio ul
. . . Pobre : mY

’ Se inclina mfs’a hacer un ‘cuento A un grupo
Aparte a un amfgo o conocido
Solamente cuando lo animan

i

Inpresida general del tenperanents y sentide del huror:
(varque la descripcién nis epropiada, :

Tipo canpechano que rfe con gron placer, :
Su sentido del humor. es directo, no sutil, y aunque
& veces es ruidoso, raramente es Gesagradable o

‘xeprensible. . Ia rayorfa del tiempo su buen humor
eS contagioso,. Se .

Tipo comsechano que cuando rfe lo hace con dastante placer, ©
Sin exbsrgo, es frecuentexente seco y & veces poco

tolerante y algo desprovisto de bien humor. Su bromag

‘son. directas, hasta crudas y a veces impropias. Tiende
a'ser la clase de persona que se rfe de otros y no con ~

otros, ——



--- Page 450 ---
12.03.03 Sino bienhunsrads que a@ veces suede ser consid eraco. .
: alesse y despreacupado. ‘Sus chistes sen avispados : ‘mez
y Cgertuncs, Es muy sensible a los estados de dnizo
y sentinientos Ce otros, y a. monsdo pucde anima una.
. 7 risa muy apropiadamente, dcngce hasta cierto punto
. : " "de gusta bromear con otra, nunca es erucl o insensible. _

. ~ 12.03.08 Goneraimente es tipo algo ‘tranquil o y afable que a
_ . + + waee's puede volverse sorprendentemente alegre y des-
. : ., BReocupado. Sin embargo, cuando est alegre a veces ©
rn - se extrolinita y nmolesta uA POCO a los que estdn a
oO : su alreded Sus bromas son a reaudo avispadas pero
*. puede volverse muy sorcdstico y aun mordaz en ocasiones

21.03.05 Tipo de buenas maneras, gencrolnente muy convencional
. . y propio, No aparece desprovisto. ae buen huror
necesariamente, pero lo muestra muy raramente. A”
veees es diffeitl conocer si est de buen humor, dcbido
a su manera de esconder 'y frenar sus sentimicntos, Ticne ~ ;
humorismo iatencionado nfs bien que -eepontdnee pero munca _ .

burde o impropio.
11.03.06 . Tiz0 austero y sinwrd hunorfstica, siempre serio @
intenso, ¥s, diffedl bromear en su presencia, cn parte
yorgke no reaponde aello yen parte porque parcee
serle molesto. . , .

21.03.07 = ‘Tizo sensate y.de mundo, de sutil yena a hunorfstica.

: ~. Sa un ambiente adecuado puede sex muy atrayente y divertido,
pero su humorismo tiene cierta cualidad eristocrdtica y *
puede ser muy condescendiente con los que no entienden
© no aprecian su hurcorismo. ,

“.. 22,03.08 Gipo artigicioso algo efnico que a veces puede ponerse -

‘ . > guy impertinente. Sus chistes tienden a ser un poco
@esorbitados. -Parece tchtt chistes privades que comparte
coa sus {ndinos, A veces es dif{cil saber si ‘trata ce.

. ser ehistoso o sutilnente hostil. : a

11.03.09 Fe ‘Yinguna de las diteriores desertpeiones le cabe.
_° ' Yo lo deseribirfa como sigue: .

SL : ua



--- Page 451 ---
22.
12.02

12,02,01

12.01.02

12.01.03

‘12.01.04

12.01.03

'. En presencia de mujeres és Beso. V Corricnte

|

\
cia lo eoxuad os

Su actitud ha

thy osctra

. pister2 ee ccterminar
_Rorcat para su cultura y anteeentes”
t ' Careate de interds
. : Tnadiferente
: De interés bien definido

Vulgar _
_ Hostal : Indiferente
Asiste a espectdeulos donde ac ton mujeres sextdesnudas
A menudo Nunca, = A veces, en grupo
No puecto y imagindrmelo en en tales sitios eee
~, No sé lo que Ls de tales espectdceulos
iG Le oi ral Waedfe. ce ghee” cry pale, oo
Entre ‘hontres, habla de lo ‘sexual
: : A menudo A veces

Raxanenta t. Nonca,

gCambla ca su comportantento y/o ‘actitudes sobré lo
sexual Gespuds. de bebor? *. sf Noy’ No sg
En caso ottreativo, deseriba “OX Soinbioy " °

“he



--- Page 452 ---
Se

14st

12.01.06 gTiere usted idea de su opintéa acerca de las prostitytas?
Ssf_ v7 No

: "12.01.07 Si no, .zoree usted que es tipo que
Irfa donde una prostituta -

No puedo incgirarlo con una prostituta

ro tenso fundamento para opinar

12.01.07 Si tiene idea, diga-si dicha opinién es de
: . Necgativisno hacia las prostitutas

’ Indiferencia hacia las prostitutas
Interés cn las prostitutes
Ea sus relaciones con las mujeres, acta —
. Generalmente de acuerdo con su edad y experiencia
Generalmente con poca madurez, que no concuerda
“- gon au edad y experiencia
“Con bastante soltura y equilibrio
Con bastante inguietud 0. torpeza

an i Wl

-12,02,10 en “AL deseribir a uns Bujer atractiva es més provable que

{ i
oe a] :
i . . a . . -mencione * El pelo Los scnos . C2
i : 2] : . = ; Los ojog_ La ropa 4
a La figura, </~La personalidad i
na - Las piernas No sé _
uh oe
oa -12,01,12 zha ofdo usted a una mujer describirlo? SL_V_ No
gl En caso afirmativo, qué dijo de ¢1 la mujer? :

Sue (afag 1 agracts MC . re

. kite reg Rel ex ata - oe . a by
_ 12.02 Impresign general; 4Cudl. de las siguientes descripeiones le Soe
viene mejor:

12.02.01 | Es hombre elemental, robusto, que no parece apocarse en
. wee fs materia del sexo, Trata a las mujeres aprupiadazcnte,
ey : pero hace poco esfuerzo por esconder su admiracién y
. Te atraceién. ‘Parece viril y confiado hacia las mujeres Ya da

mayorfa, ee ellas les ograda. .

12,0202 . Es hombre elenental, robusto, que ocasionalmente puede ser
: burdo o hasta vulgar. Trata a las mujeres algo Ssperanente y
puede volversa muy insistente cuando lo atrac una nujer,

: . Parece estar muy orgulloso de su virilidad. Su agresividad . _é
ofenderfa o revelerfa & muchas mujeres, pero eso 4 a parece oe
no inportarle. . .
: 4 . 43.



--- Page 453 ---
14-00000

Use

12.02.03

12.02.04

12.02.05

32.02.06

12.02.07

‘en sus relaciones con las mujeres es

.

» muy atento con -
z la mano de wna mujder

» a cenudo echa el brazo

; usa lisonjas y frases ce
cortesfa pero lo race de manera agradable. A la myorfa Wa

iste sus

de las mujeres les gus G atenciones.——-,--.'-

Es kemere serisual, pero en forma penosa ¢c insegura.. Es
horzre ‘-blanducho que se esfuerso por no ofender. Sin
exzarco, frecuerteccate sigce con la pirada a une trujexr
atractiva cuando cree que nadie lo mira. También se
A{sclina a tropezar con las tujeres © a tocarlas

“ “acctdentalzente” cuando tiene oportunidad. ~—————~ .

Es hosbre confiado y bastante pulido que es correcto
y convencional hacia hombres y ujeres y @8 diffeil
adivinar sus ectitudes e intereses sexuales. .En un
grupo siempre se corporta de acuerdo con las reglas y
usualnente de manera muy eficiente. : :

Es hombre confiado y preciso, con cierto aire-de .
profesional. Es cortés hasta ce). lfmite y se toma las -

nayores molestias por encenderle el cigarrillo a una

doa U ocuparse de que esté Dien atendida,. Sin embargo,

bastante distante. --.-
A veces su formalidad estd fuera de lugar pero rarozente,

9 nunca combia sus nodales 0 procedintentos de acuerdo con
la situacién. co :

Un norsre agradabdle ¥ educado que es al mismo tiempo
anistoso y de.nundo. Trav a las mujeres de modo culto
pero muestra roca sensualidad o impropiedad sexual. Es
ascado y hasta apuesvo, ¥ puede ser muy meticuloso, La
mayorfa de sus relactones con las mujeres parecen ser
nuy platénicas.’ E5'cl tipo de persona que probablenente ©

tiene varias omigas intiras. _ oe

Ee hombre algo tf{nido ¢ indiferente, considerado por
elgunes singular o extrato, Muestra poco o ningia interds
en las mujeres en pfolico. =n general es persona preo- |
cupada que solozente busca lo compatifa de otras con inte--
resea similares. “La mayorfa de las veces tiene elerto  —*

atre asedtico y asexual. |

Winguna, de las anteriores descripeiones cade. Yo lo”
Geseribirfa asf: _



--- Page 454 ---
4-90000

45>

, , ¥. VIDA FALILIAR :
13. Estado civil '
: “33.01 gest ensado? , . i Sf_\" No
23.01.01 ” avitve su esposa con 61? so ees al v No
“13.01.02 wa su espona & funefones sociales con 17 ‘ b :
Nunca__. , Rirazente____ _, Normalmente___ A menudo \ / .
"23.02.03, Su esposa.es Mayor que él__ Mis-e-menos-de su cena _ ms ‘
: . . oe W4s joven que - Be sé
13.01.04 |. Su esposa es Extremadamenta atractiva_ ‘Nornalnente 3
atractiva_“ Extrenadazente poco atractiva_, :
i _ . oo .
H 13.01.05 - a general, su esposa es socialmente : Itestra Z
j _— | Aceptadle
| : - i Inepta
13.01.06 ~  Adents de eu lengua natorna, qué otros tatoms habla su | esponat

hse

;

Hl
£
a
:
i
t
t
i

| : 13.01.07 ‘Se esposa es = Ms tnstriiea que dL Ton instrulda j

: : coe . So , como GL‘ Menos Tnstruida que el y/

H : —— oo

i. 13.01.08 " ystuvo 6) casado anterfornenter - Sf No_W Se « No ‘sé f

H ——

‘En caso afirmativo sirvase dor detalles si Los conc ‘conoda,

/ Co oy

i 13.02 Su espose parece Tener muchas omistades Tener pécas
{ . onistades Ko tency casi anistade: . .
i : 13.02.0L | En piblico, para con qu esposa, €l es bay atento _
. } . . . : . Bastante atento!’ v ‘
: i ; . 0 Indiferente | —
F 13.02.02 En piolico, para con él, su ¢sposa es _ Muy atenta i
: : : . Bastarite atenta |
Indiferests zt
13.02.03 : Deseribirfa ‘usted a su 1 esposa como ; .
Ageesiva__—: Dominante__ Independiente, : :
Complaciente___- - Sunisa Tependiente : _ . ;



--- Page 455 ---
~ oN

336 C204 En la zona csaie

= ver en su casat

estado usted al.
Ea caso asircativo, | f= winta frecuencia?
: : fr. ees >

13.03.61 TA vivionga @e ellos es En

1
13.03

ero elegahte para la zona
rizica ce ie roma ‘ v .
En extrezo petre para ia conn . : . . |

"13.03.02 Como unfitriones, les esposos son: TInusitadonente buenos
_ Brenos_ Agecuados Me deficieates
: Ea extrexo ‘eeficientes

© 13:03.03 “Como anfitriona, la.sefiord parece: May en su anbiente
: oo Bien séaptads Vv Aigo nerviosa -
ce , , hay incdroda .

13.03.04 Su vivienda Ss Refleja la personalidad de 61
_ . | Refleja la personaiidad de ambos
xO) ‘refleja- ris personalidad ae ninguno

13.03.05 . En general e2 nobilis-io es a Descolorido
Convencional \/ De inusitado. buen gusto

intercsada en su casa ccno la

rfa de sus vecinas .
Visiblenente indiferente a ia casa

"Ha sé si realmente se interesa 0 no

a

a

i pote b Seana Wi nm So

j 13.03.07 : EL comportaniento socisl Ge ella en. casa es
H eo .¥4s 0 menos el ciszo que fuera de ella.
| ‘ coe : |. | Mas en su ambiente que fuera ée elle .

. Menos ea su anbiente .

} —~
i —
|
i —
| . . ne 13.03.c5 . La sefiora esta” _Nisiblenente interesada en su casa’ Z
i _—_——
—
i

—

"23.03.08 . Normalmente soa gente que
po - : - Recibe a renudo y le gusta hacerlo
; . ample com sus compromisos sociales y le’ gusta .
“bastante oe v_ oe _
Prefiere inviter sélo a sus fatinos - “oe
‘ Recibe s6lo cucndo es de obligaciéa
, Prefiere no recibir a nadie :
vs
ee

13.08 oa geritica Gasu ‘esposa2 . wo SE No
: Ea | Ca50 afirzativo,” gqud es Lo que se tnelina nfs a eriticar?

46



--- Page 456 ---
"13.0401 Ea general, como matrinonio sont
Yisidierente compatitics Norscainente compatibles

. Visiblemente poco cOmpatioics,

ae) . 13.0%.02 EL se inclina a: Hunca porecer celoso de ella
mo, . Rarameate parecer eeloso ce cila .
_ pareces: a menudo celoso de elie

/
oan ay
: 13.04.03 Ells se inelina a: inca porecer celosa de 41.
Lo on Rarazente parecer celosa ce él i
Parecer.a menudo celosa de éL sf.

13.04.04 "- gfene le esposa alguna-caracterfstica que requicra nencién © , og .
© descripeiéa especial? oo a oo, -

& 1ROS Como esposo, se le puede cescribir uds bien cond: co oo
: : a Hombre expresivo que ¢S visiblemente el cényuge
: douinente ene] cotrironto. Tiende 9 proteger & su
esposa y cuando es posible sieupre la incluye cn sus
actividades sociales.

Hombre activo que como esposo es autoritario y dominante.

Py . , : Es poseyente “con su esposa y¥ tiende a sex exigcnte con

7 : . ella. | ; : 4
Honbre! expresivo que depende mucho de su esposa. Ella :

: tiende' a ser el cényuce deminante y él parcce estar a t

gusto y esperar que asf sea.

. a)

Forbre activo pero: de genio algo dspero que visibdlerente
: a - depende mucho de su esposa pero yaranente lo conficsa,
oot Puede tener alguna tendencia a eer celoss y poscyente ui
con su; esposa. Lo. :

ee Vv Narido: como le mayorfa que trata a su esposa con reapeto. :

: . Rarazente delata en pidlico. lo que giente. Es diffcil - * :

conocer sus verdaderos sentimientos par clla. Peas yf tt

yl pi@hetee &Atese le Pe Loh lhe Pols

Marido’ consciente de sus deberes que, toma Su rmatrizealo oon)
corre pare{as con él y axbos :

ilia y socicles.

—

bt LO . muy seriozente. Su esposa
. tomin en serio las obligaciones de fan:

: : . oo onbrd socialnente activo que puede ser muy galante con a
7 a . . les damas aun en presencia de su esposa. Parccen evar ve
. vidas 'separadas pero muy compatibles.

ny

bon. MT



--- Page 457 ---
14-0000

456

i
Hy
i
4

| Eercre trangutlo que vistblerente €erence de su esposa

eR cit grado. Ella s2 ceura de ¢2 de manera poco
Ostenwwsa pore es visible que fiafluye bastante en su
conzerteriesto y actituces. .

nouns de ies anteriores deseripeiones le viene tien.
Yo lo daseribirfa cone sigue:

‘4a : .

i
|

:
£
t
i
:



--- Page 458 ---
. “13.06 Eocer:
cia o el funclonasicnto fe cu

. \
a : ys¢ coupa di ce la aparien
ensa? - Tee Sf oj Ko
+ yioce reperactozes de poca importancia por ef picrt
. vo . St No
‘en caso aircative, les hace Medianozcnte bien?
a , : -forperents? v7

: yu ape,

(go?

Ve Bye
Ubon plete 1. bijos?
° g 14.02.01 nénere de’ nijos 7. rasdes jt jf
ot > -Vy,01.02 | gViven todos sus hijos con él?
: . En caso negativo, ydénde viven?
l c ,
i 3»
|
. | b 14.01.03 ‘Se ocupa de sus bijos De manera inusitada , .
! ts St : . De manera normal =
| i . “Poco . :
i B an : . V .
' Fa 14.01.04 Su espesa es Madre inusitadamente atenta
i gS . -Yadre normal : .
! g, , _ Madre inusitadanente indiferente__
a E (2 M4.02.05 Los hijos se comportan Inusitadanente bien — /
i : : st : Lo Normalmente bien
! : - En extreno canorristas, dif{ciles
| 14.02.06 Diga si él Nunca. hadla de sus hijos__ Rora vez habla
i : : de sus hijos flabla de sus hijos evando
i corresponde + Hablg de sus hijos con .
frecuencia Parece nuy ypreocupado por :
, ‘sus hijos : . :
. 14.02.07 yfiene alguno de sus hijos algo anormal. (constitucién
° : enfermiza, alergias, déefecto rental, defornidad 0 V :
: st No 4

pordlisis, especial intelicgeneio)?
En caso afirnativo, descrfbalo:-

2 fo mule plead

St EP oy =
sun “ot.. Ser Beare Fone —e

Chives OC U0 :
4 48

4
ER



--- Page 459 ---
14-0000

ate:

“18.08 Cuando ecposa y fontlia estén ausentes de casa : \
_— Se ve muy solo y sin saver qud hacer :
“ . 7 : Mantieae protabies, se sumitén
‘ . . Probables xe intensizica su actividad social | ;
. y No sé oe que Bac
co Ae Me a Me slrin pa poem

re 14.03 Como aang se le Oe Geserdbix ‘tdjor asf:

Soo - . Padre de familia activo y feliz, orgulloso de su

& a fonilia, .

a to . Padra’ de Tanilia active que tiende a sor estricto yoo op we
. . exigente con sus hijos, - ne,

Padre de Tanilia activo que pasa mucho tiempo con ella.
Tiende a caleriar & sus hijos. :

Padre de fanilia activo pero inseguro Que se preocupa,
mucho con sua hijos.

. Padre activo y responsable, pero que no tolera tontcrias.
Su trabajo es prinero y la fenilia to sade. mo,

e . iv Padre responsable y cuidadoso, cizplidor con su
fenilia pero no muy afectuoso o expresivo.

Padre aespreocupado que no picrde sueNo por la fonilia.
La rayorfa del tiempo sus ‘niembres sa las orregian por tay
su cuenta, con duen cxito, _ ,

Padre indiferente que a veces parece no darsc cuenta: .
de su Torilia. 7 . :

Ninguna’ de las anteriores deseripetones le viene bien. :
Puede ser descrito mejor cono sigze: , oa

WS Digan si leva fotos de - - iW, - i
- Su familia - . Su esposa o
. Sus Ri Jos Sf miszo ‘
. 18.05 EA su ofteina © cuarto exhibe fotos de AM Su fontlia 3
, _ Suesposa___ Sus hijos\ } Sf miszo . ;
. 18.06 a aesy alguna ‘earacterfaticn en sus relactones con su esposa oO su

fonilia que requiera Ecacidn o descripeiin especialt



--- Page 460 ---
400000

ys

“At

VI. POSICION DINGS

t3. 000 Gerard : :

is.cn ER generat, t

_Es hombre de opiniones frencas y evidentes. Es copaz
de expresar dichas opiniones sin inportarle al parecer
Cid nacleos y actituées dea otros.

a0S

~ ~ : oe ; a Es hombre da ruchos prejuicios e ideas dogzdticas.
Puede expresarlos acalorada y resucltazente cuando
es recesario. oo

Es hombre que posiblencate desvfa opiniones do
controversia con licereza o buen humor. A veces
es diffctl conocer sus opiniones porque es diffedl
hacerlo hablar con seriedad.

i : : : Es hombre que puede tencr muchas opintones firmes
pero se le huee diffeil rostrarlas, ‘Tienda a
disculparse y a mostrar tinicez y desasosicgo

woes sees Tweuando se avecdna una discuss dn. :

Es hombre cuyas verdaderas opiniones son difteties
@e conocer; Usualmente ¢3 diplomitico y convencional —
cuando go discuten temas polézicos o prohibdidos.

ae . Es horbre serio y resuclto a portarse en forma

: apropiada y convencional. Tiene las reneras de una
persona bien disciplinada que solamente dice lo que
se cupone decir o lo que otros esperan que diga,

Es un hombre de. opiniones muy cducadas.. Est& bien

nformmado y es capaz do sostener ua argurento de
manera considerablenente orticulada, pero & veces
se vuelve efnico o cutilmente sarcdstico. .

Es hombre tfeido y taciturno en cuanto a sus opi-
niones. Hs nuy éiffcil hacerle expresarse sobre
ua tema, particularmente oi es texa polénico. ~

i . YWinguns de las enterlores deseripsiones sixve; ce
H : : : le describe mejor como sigue}



--- Page 461 ---
Pateate e intenso

4

15.01.0 yay alga teza que tierce oO ponerlo colérico?
Ea caso afirsative, youd est
- 15.02 . ' Be hoxbdre cuyo patriotiszo ¢s

st

Com el de ia mayorfa de sus colegas

Cauteloso y no muy intenso
‘Diffeil de precisar

25.02.01. Ea asuntos _gencrales ge politica

Ceneralnente esta bien infornado sobre la posicién

y actitud de su pafs

, on Esté tan blen informado cone la mayorfa, de sus:

colegas
Bstd extremadomente mal infornado

TK Ru


--- Page 462 ---
VII. BISTORIAL $uaIco -

16. = Estado de salud
‘26.02 Que usted ecpa, ytiene ¢2 algéa problem do salud? Sf{___. No__\/

En caso afirrativo, explique: .- .

st_V we

* : {Tienen gu espoca o bijos aigén problema de salud: oy!
" "0" “En caso afirmativo, explique: - : .

so , . EY 7 eeeel’ 4 feet b yew le be age
ba wee “eo by fade ce OG “

i : _ 16.03 ga tndteado al, vez Le tenido problenas de salud en . wa
_ el pasado? : sto. .
oa : En caso afirnativo, explique: :

16.04 “que usted sepa, ztoma regularzente pftdoras ° medieina do. J vt
rs alguna clase? . Ss a : No oo

' En caso efirmativo, explique:

|
i
i
i

16.05 Es persona que: liunca habla de cu salud o de lo que sicnte
: Fadla como todos de su salud o de lo qua siente _ Frecuentcnente
habla de su salud o de lo que siente .

16.06 _ “Cuando 82 signte ral: Todos se percatan, Se nota de modo
: normsl_-/ La xayorfa de la gente no Lo notarfa.

Nunca he sabido que se sienta ral .

my fr “OSS VI

en ee



--- Page 463 ---
UGS

4 : ‘ f mo . : .
. 26.07 Su aspecto cs . Robusto y saludavie ~ Ve , |
senttalsente ¢ como la sayorte. a su edad ey
/ : fae tafernizo j
- H
--- 2€,.03- - Glens Cara soludable. Vv Borriga grande :
. Sudanita ¢ faTSatie el alieato el esforzarse
. fuses SrZas y bécedas_ ss eadencia a sudar © : “,
: : esnasiade - Nal elfe eliento : oo . i
. y . i
16.09 . Que usted cops,“ ytlenc dicta o régizen especial? 4} /.. vt
: : . a No }
: “TER ¢oso afizcative, explique: , . Lo,
: ars . . . a mo
~ . .
. 16.10. Be manera . generat, le parece tndtviduo que A. H
. ' @icne mutha energfa y no sc consa nunca _“ :
Tier energfa, pero no siempre : {
iene cnercfa moderada — j
Es ietdrgico, indiferente :
q

. 16.11. ~ may ago ea cuanto a su salud o la de Bu fonilia que deba ser
: _ “eonentado ea éetalle? ©

: } . ; i

i A 3 Hee, nied Ae aes eee fete CA wee” :

wt ‘ Aji? WE. PLA wine PA pie “EY eye :
t

Me oa lec 7 ia ipl plenisered pete OARS,
crthent fit . 7

olf # Speckle a got Be etd ay

Bye. Tithe. of e tee CfEG ee a Bo. 8

i

o
2
os

7 ST 83



--- Page 464 ---
rr ~ cam

a oo . .
eR EE 3 pelt tage

Soviet Crer.

AUMIBAITS mie the following comzents eencerning what appeared to

donc. contacts eni/or xodus obsrendt of Soviet intel-

| Debriefing eonductad 23-26 April 1070: a
LOGUICV - During the affair between AENIDRIFF end LOGIOV, —

they went to the rovies once or twice a week, the Futurama and Cine Mod

being the theaters most frequently attended. LOGINOY elwzys rade sone
: aoe =

i 3 +
sort of!contect during these outings, escording to AEMIDRIFF. She. stated

that he usually left his szat about 2309 hours and went ont to the lobby —
ot + sot .

for sometime. She did not know where the contcets were actually mace, -

Once she and LOGHOV encountered, apparently accidentally, outside the , :

Cine Mod theater, a Mexican Arny Colonel, who was introduced to her by : :

LOGINOV ‘as “Col. Sergio." In this instance LOGINOY eld not excuse hinself”
_ to have a Private conversation with’ the Mexicen. "Col. Sergio" was de-

i .
scribed by AEMIDRIFF as about 40, tall, no moustache or glasses, thick, :

curly hsir, appesred to be of gpanish descent. Tne woman with "Col. t
" Sergio" appeared to be about 25 years old and was introduced as his wife . i
: H

(which AEMIURIFF doubted because, es she pt it, he didn't treet her as. !
one would a wife, but rather as a oistress). AEMIDRIFF knew nothing rore :
about this Mexican and never saw hia again. | ° : : i
On another occasion, LCGINGY and AEMIDRIFF met an American in. : :
frontof the Futureca theater. LOGINOY introduced hin to her as "Col.

Michael." ADTORIFY stoted that he vas dressed in civilien clothes. He

SECRET :
‘Jor aesyr2


--- Page 465 ---
oy Ww

‘when the Soviets vented to get sonething throuch Aduana; when soze Soviet _

we

.

esimated this encounter took Place atout Septenter $59. :

ed that GOLCUZOY used her in the

a

"sare manner, i,e., tock ber ebsut 3 tinss in all to Cire Chapultepec, then

left her during the covie to rake senz sort of contact.

ged 12-16 May 1970:

ict Contacts in the tt

xiean Folice: ADIDRIFF

stated that she overkesrs: GOLCUSOV end DYCMIN talk about many contects which :

they had in the police here. She said she had also overheard Koucxwaxov,

FAKULIN, AND CEAYXEOY tels about how many good police contacts the Soviets

have. However, eech specific example which AFMIDRIFF could give concerned oy

soe nou-operstional fevoz which the Soviets could eet taken care of, e.g,

vas missing and police ceorerstion was needed; getting advance notice when : fy
some demonstration hostile’to the Soviets was about to take place, etc. .

She was not able to recall eny hints that Soviets had orerational contacts

‘in the police: agents rererting on what the police were doing; assets who

assisted’ Soviets operatinsally in sere way. However, AEMIDRIFF thought

the Sovicts ‘probably have such assets.
Concerning Soviet contests in West Cerccn Police: AENYDRIFP : ‘

recalled ‘that vhen she went to Cerasny as interpreter for Soviet surgeon

gnd texttook writer, Pablo For oT, in January 1968 (they vent to Colome

SECRET



--- Page 466 ---
4 00000

Be . . Cee ee

tes}, the Sovies Abasssy sdom in

Rest Corzauny of Cec cereiel Ministry bas

West Goria ry steled that the Enbassy. hed sens paid agents within the
ye

holped thea to protect the Sovicts (tn coz text that is

Gerzsn police 1

some Sovies offi official could be Kidnepred by- the ensny,

that AMASOV Was quite old and very .pro-rering.

Niseedonecus Opsbationag notes . ADHEDRIFF hed no-knowledge

She stated that mony Soviet

of ‘Soviet sefe houses or safe apsrtrant

visitors steyed at the Hot el Virreyas 7 in two ¢
Soviet Enbassy (she couldn't p
Soviets had ony sort of special en; an ese hotels.:
AEMTDRIFF stated thas “she had attend Sed several Parties at
which Mexicans also vere present - (she recalled specifically part ties et the
hone 2s of KOLCHM¥AKOY, FAXULIY, LOGTHOV) and in each instance the’ Soviet
officer, at 2952 point curing the evening, had a private conversation with
@ Mexican guest. (Unfortunately, Azparss was unable to recall the. renes
of any of the Mexicans she met on these oc ecasions, and of course there is-
nO Way Of knowing whether such private conversations. were orerational
ucetings.)} AEMIDRIFP commented that at purely Soviet Parties, hustands alt

ways went off together and talked business, ani if vives approzched, they

stopped their conversation. _ : : .

Debriefing conducted 1-6 June 1970:
RS Conducted 1-6 June 1970:

KORMUSENIN « AEMIDRIFF commented thet she thought KORMUSHAIN

made operational reetings in the Bremen Ber, since she often say hin
sitting in that bar, wearing Gerk Glasses snd trying to oc’ inconsnicucus.

‘ SECRET



--- Page 467 ---
and would look inside, elthcuch she

ad by this r
to

1

+ Possible PGY Contact =) ALMIDAIFF stated thet she

was told by imaiol Montiel (Maniel MERDSZ Montiel, £01-250951), the Sovict's
chauffeur, thet his brother, who is a Central Comittee number of the FCM

and who worked on the PCM publication "La Voz de Mexico," was in contact

‘3°

with KUPLYAXOY. In addition, AEMIDAIT

cteted thst she belicved that,

Verdugo, 201-851726) had en

Aszando VERLUGS (iden with Armando

uncle, elso naned Armendo VERDUGO, vho is ‘First Sceretary of the FCM and
who is in contact with. KUPLYANOY. At lecet this was strongly inferred by
Montiel, eccording to AFMIDRIFF., (Editor note: Arncléo MARTINEZ Verdugo,
201-06425h, who is brother of Armando, is First Scéretary of PCH).
AEMIDRIFF stated that KUPLYAKOV always seoned to be very interested in and
Knowledgeable of what appeared in "La Vod de Mexico" and in the PC Publi-
cation "La Epoca." She stated that, in general, KUPLYAKOY paid so much
attention té local polities and seeréd to be so vell informed on PCH
matters that she felt certain he had conething to do with the FCM.
AEMIDRIFF stated that KUPLYAKOV "s wife was a good friend of
Salvador GONZALEZ Marin, head of the Fondo de Cultura Popular. GONZALEZ' *
wife works in the Museum of Anthropology. GCHZALEZ sold a lot of Soviet
books, according to AEMIDHIFF, and for that reason was in contact with
KUPLYAK » but she commented that GCIZALEZ roy also have been utilized
by KUPLYAXOV in soze other operational way, Most of KUPLYAKCV's céntects

seem to te journalists. (Tnese vere tho people AEMIPRIFF sew talking to him

at receptions, ete.).
: SECRET


--- Page 468 ---
“SECRE®? .
Se ,

ATSIORIFE stated that Jaopeldo ARE

AL, whose eife is the

dsughter of Devid Alfsro SIQUIENOS, {5 another Soviet ssset who ts hendled

by KUULYAMGY (rho Lesrd VANOVSXIY talk about this). APHIPRTFP sefd that

AREAL Worke with Eiuardo ARAWO (ecenevile consultent fos Nnera Conti-

nentel; S.A.", rondionsd in Comrercinl Office). she also stated sha

- knew that ARERAL vent at tints to the. Fabasey to sec KUPIXANOY., ARMIDRIFF

‘sedd thot. ARENAL gves to Moscow every your or 60.. - (AREUAL identical

with Isopoldo-AAERAL Fastsn, 200-217999).

SECRET



--- Page 469 ---
SO AprLL LOG: ALNLINLF? stuted thst

. a LOSThROy wont out ot algits eften during this ferlod and told ker ‘it was

vas some of the most dangereas he had. ever done. SEI CAIEP was certcin

that these “contacts” involved in student riots. ALL RUFF related that

once at Auto Cine, LOSINGY meds a cecting with a group of. youths xho cane
in enother car (Fetcon), “Anothes ting, core 2 or 3 dsys later, LOGY
hea MITOPOLSKL sive hin sexe, shotguns which MITOPOLSAI hed charge of.

LostHov got the guns about 2200 a» 2500; the guns were returned. ‘the n

morning. Others ‘*ho seemed to be going out al). tha tine at night during

the student riots {and talking about their mcetings in general the next
. : morning } vere LOLSUAKOV, K RORMUSAIN, NIKIPOROV. ARMIDALE? never heard
. : “mention of money teing pussed during this period (1.06, to Soviet asscts
So . involved in riots) nor any mentien of any nsaes or positions of assets

| f (Tris not in agrecnent with soze of Pan James info). CEMYKOV seemed to be -

, involved also.

- Debriefing conductes 12-16 May 1970: ADUIDAIFF was again

“gue sstioned on her knowledge of Soviet activities during the 1968 student ©

| disorders. Ske reported thet all she really knew was thet the Soviets were
very busy euring this period; that LOGIUOY. told her. he was going out every
. 1

2 an inight to make “eontacts;" _ that she overhserd Soviet case officers talking.

|at various times during this period to effect that they very busy, meking

mony contacts3 that the’ situation was potentially explosive and a dangerous
/ tise for thea to be making such coatects. AEMILRIFF twice vas with LOGINOV

SECRET


--- Page 470 ---
" @uty officer for the Enxbassy for thet night. “

"youths" in frivate ecaversations. Hovever, AGL

ur any mention af any astce of Soviet consnets . \

+ plaudent disorders, aay meiiien of the level of ine 4

ain the gtudest orgeniistiens, cny mention of

volver
ant, |

Soviet guidance to the ctudent moverent, finsneing uf the ctudent rah
or the lie. Sie really deesn't know that the Soviets had any contsets

ny sctivities, wut sha strongly

with direct access to information to th:

assures that they did, based oa their level of estivity and the atrong

. 1
tenor that LOGLIOV and other ease ofMesrs gave te the idea that the contacts

: . i
they were making were dangerous ones for thea to be seen with during this
. a f

we i
t

period.

Debriefing conductsd 1-6 O70: ASUIDRIFE questioned
re 1968 studeat disorders agotn, for clarification previously reported
eotalls. She stated that the Soviets hai sone different types of rifles
in the Comerciel Office which served as sexples of puns which they vere
trying to sell commercially in Mexico. One night about 11 o'clock, curing
the period of student riots, LOGINGV exe to the Cosmercial Office with
NI'TOPOSSKT. (22¢IDRIFF was there watching IV). hey got "sore" rifles -
AEMIDIF could not see how many or what kind, They tock thea cut in gone .
sort of bess. Tae next acrning "sone" rifles were returned to the Con-
mereiel Office, but AEMIDRIFF doesn't know vhether ell of then vere
brought back. : ste doesn't know whether ox not LOGINOY might have teen
AEMIDRGY stated that WCHIPCREXXO's trip tack to the USSR
during the 1658 ricts ray well have teen to report on the riots. However,
she didn't knov that this was the case and noone speci Meolly told her 80.

SECRE?


--- Page 471 ---
14-0000

wre

$-E-C-R-E-T
MPREFS SYM NUMBER _ O0C. DATE _ CLASSIFICATICN
201-285412 | FMMA-38637 (06 APR 70 201-789963-

THE ABOVE DOCUMENT (S$) IS CROSS REFERENCED
TO THE 201 FILE CITE UNDER LEFTY MARGIN.

S-E-C-R-E-T

BATE 05/05/70
_ MRER SS SHEET.
see wee es coe ee a &

c



--- Page 472 ---
H
° _

lS DESERSIMTEDREDT OP AEMIDRIFE cmt Ufa 031936"
lo. oY

|. ; EXPERIENCE I LATIN AMERICA FRotl PRIOR Tours Brad tt eres Hr

iC / LYUDNILA SHAPOVAL OVA: wakes UIDER SOKOLOV [ty REFERENT ore:
GC SERVED rN CUBA’ AT ONE TINE, a

~

- ‘ a.
Toran C on™. % ) Fouries anocen minneat
wm 4]

eo ne
POVANEE Cor Jue Orono
—— ee
ra

Ov a

27 10 ene vo O acruny ro ———. =.
a

SECRET 2523142 FEB 70 o dive wEXICO crry. 2565.

DIRECTOR ~ |
.- REF: NEXICO CITY 2557 (10 O31735.
1. PER REF, AEHIDRIFF CONTINUED REVIEW OF PHOTOS WITH Has

DEBRIEFER AND LITENPO-14, REVIEV OF 83 PHOTOS CINCLUDING WIVES)
DURING 28 AND 21 FEGRUARY SESSIONS FROVIDES FOLLOWING HIGHLIGHTS In

, ADDITION To OTHER INFORMATION WHICH WAS ALREADY KNOWN:
VALENTIN BAKULIN: CHIEF OF ONE, OF AEGRIP SECTEOtSy——-

°: _ ARGENTINA, an n .
‘on : LEV GoLouzovs WORKS UNDER BAKULIN (WHICH TEP

of “AEGRIP StTaTuS PREVIOUSLY SUSPECTED). VHILE DRUNK RO Kast Poe
Sa INFORMED AEMIDRIFF SHE BEING | ‘SENT HOME,

’ KATHY.

SERGEY PROVOROV: works UNDER BAKULIN. AEGR
“Ve NIKOLAY SOKOLOV: CHIEF oF REFERENTURAs

DIANA
BARS

ALEKSAIDR KOZL OV: WORKS. 1 REFERE NWTURA UN

cal “CHARGE OF PHOTO. PROCESSIUG aro MICROFILNIEG. .
o, INTERWAL SECURITY AND AS WATCHDOG. HAPPY ALD
“oe : Pad. GISSEM ioie

ey OSB

os cohy



--- Page 473 ---
}4-00000 *

hyn

Cacre Secue TARUIAT AT Disse nus HATION CLaSssiFico Mes

Tovat. Copiss ‘ ROUTES ATDGA aT Assi
wae | PanswiysF notes TA ae ge ES
we .

yous
uC Be oan
Wiser Filled In)
a
KUFRODU: Ors OF THIS COPY PROHIDIVED

oun C)ves Cjno

ChAtHFY TO CaPRE HO, : .
:

ADVANCE Copy { sur { Juorree

z

REF 10 69 Fre HO, _
. —_
Ossem oY. een — }O meno © reruns 10

eee
oO Rete oT

PAGE 2 MEXICO CITY 2565 SEGRE T ; ;
- VLADIMIR: TSERADZE: WORKS IN REFERENTURA BUT IS ALSO UIDER-
QDERS OF BAKULIN. TIMID, DOMINATED BY WIFE, _
; -YURTY ROMANE NKO: WoRKS Ia RETERENTUR AS FREQUENTLY ACCOMPANIES
PAVEL KOVALEV OUT AT NIGHT. DRINKS A LOT AND HAS TROUBLE WITH
7 WIFE BECAUSE OF IT, . ;
yurty XUPL YAKOV: HAS” 9B SIMILAR ‘TO OL oMYAKov" Ss. VERY
IMPORTANT ‘PERSON WITHIN EMBASSY AND HAS ACCESS To REFEREMTURA.
ERY REFINED AND CULTURED. Many IICHY CONTACTS THROUGHOUT
. MEXICO AND ALSO CULTIVATES FRIENDSHIPS WITH DIRECT ORS OF
-MUSEUHS, LIBRARIES AND OTHER sucH INSTITUTIONS,
_—- BORIS CHMYXOV: VERY EXPERIENCED, SEEWS TO HAVE PERFORMED
* RRILLIAWTLY IN Past wITK, HO FaILures, SOMETHING OF A LADIES' —
MA AND HAS, OW otcastow, BEEW MIXED UP IN INTERNAL SCARDAL.
: ERAMORED oF SOKOLIBA. TRAVELS FREQUENTLY THROUGHOUT WEXICO. .
, VLADISLAV KORMUSHKTM: AEKICK. SERVED In BRAZIL, SEVERAL

o 20. MONTHS IN FRANCE AND Fou To sIx HONTHS IN ARGENTINA. SPEAKS

“4 SPANISH, FRENCH AND PORTUGUESE.

VALERIY KOSTIKOV: AEKICK =
"Gee Korolev: AEKICK _ ae ne
t | WLADINIR: MaKaR ove, HoT. CERTAIN, BUT PROBABLY AEGRIP. HOWEVER ,
| - GREQUERTLY acconPautes Pec shana APPEARS COLD ALD CRUEL. ORE

ener som



--- Page 474 ---
fx ! —————

& 2 - - ee
AE. i

oo POVANTE Cooy WIVES morrep RERROCUST oN oF THIS COPY PROMIDITED 4 re

we. nnn,

*
a ee

SLAMIFY YO C8 PLR NO,
—2 .

KHEP YO CSImE NO, .
Orne no © rerurn ro eae

a, BR arn

as Diso sy - Par
——— =
(Se ar

PAGE 3 MEXICO CITY 2565S ECR E Tt:
_ OF AENIDRIFF*S WATCHDOGS DURING JANUARY 1978, SPEST "TINE mm
RED CHINA en "

_ TOAKIN BULAVIH: ASSIGHED ‘To CONNERCTAL OFFICE BUT. bors NOT

FRYSICALLY EGix THERE, PROBABL Y WORKS FoR ROL OMYAKOV (OV, AEKICH (

REZIDENT.
SERGEY VERBENVEV: RIS, SERVICE UNKNOWN. PERFORNS IATERWAL
_ SECURITY ALD ¥ATCHDOS FuNcT ious. 7
“VLADIMIR GORDEYEV: BELIEVES HE AEKICK WORKING FoR SOKOLOV
"an ROLOWYAKOV, a . : .
_PAVEL KOVALEV: COWSIDERS HIM DANGEROUS. SPEAKS SPANISH an
“aw ENGLISH aLtost wrTouT ACCENT. HAS MARY FRIENDS IN” oa
“- ~GOVERNACTOR, ae o
: AWATGLIY ‘STEXL YaWurKovs BACHELOR « ponvcuenD FoR KOVALEV.” 7
WORKED FOR SECRET PoLIce 14 HoScoW. AFTER THREE YEARS Lif MILITARY. :
‘ wILL RETURN Moscoy soon, co -
" KONSTANTIN BOGATYREV: CHIEF. aLL oRcuPS OF miLrrery INTEL
IN MEXICO, CAEMIDRIFF PREVIOUSLY INDERTIFIED CHNYKOV. AS GEGRIP
CHIEF, “STATION BELIEVES cHUIYKOV POSSIBLY CHIEF FoR THOSE UNDER
CIVILIAN COVER BUT JUNIOR TO BOGATYREV.) |
GLEG SHEVCHERKO: SPEAKS SPANISH WITH ARGENTINE ACCEMT. THIS

Is FIRST TOU IN LATIN AMERICA,
. . . . _ “sEghET


--- Page 475 ---
BAITING PMO-OR INETHLLS 54 OB

Cynoreo

- ADVANCE Coty oO

BIDEAr “She ves Oe

Cuatury TO es MLE HO. |

Lome

2

vo ar

7 +f HREF VO CSPmE NO.
. Tf . <
* Osem oy O rac no © reruns ro La ee BRAN

me a PEN
“ACTON GNTr

aa FILE, VR

PAGE 4 NEXICO city 2565 SE CRET
VALENTIN Logi sovs ALTHOUSH HAD AFFAIR WITH AEMIDRIFF,
RECALL SIX MORYHS EARLY WAS DUE To SOME FAILURE AND NOT TO 7
AFFAIR, || 2 _
VALERTY SOKOLIW: RECALLED SIX MONTHS EARLY DUE TO SOME.

| FAILURE ALSO.

VIKTOR IVAKOV: LIKED TO LIVE WELL. oWnED 27 SUITS “ARD, OFTEN,
CHANGED TWO OR THREE TINES A DAY, 00D FRIE RD OF OCTAVIARD a
o CAMPOS SALAS, SECRETARY OF INDUSTRY. AMD CONNER CE wou IH os cou

"IN CHARGE EXPORTING Furs FOR SOYUZPUSHNINA, © is
‘BORIS KAZANTSEV: SERVED IN CUBA WHERE HAD SOWE PROBLEN oR
"FLAP DUE To DRINKING AND HIS CHARACTER. DOHINATED BY WIFE WHO
“gweLuences & HANY OF HIS DECISIONS, , WIFE WORKS AS TYPIST Tk
. REFERENTURA. SHE VERY JEALOUS. OF HUSBAND, YET FLIRTS wire _
YOUNGER -OFFECERS WHICH HAS CAUSED MARITAL “pROBLepyl |
FEDOR YEVESYEV: BELIEVES HE RIS, PROBABLY AEGRIP, cou.

FOR AMBASSAD GR AND CURRENTLY FOR CHARGES. BELIEVES KE Ras ho

OTHER FUNCTION. = ; : ; i:
MIKHAIL DAVIDOVSKIY? GRADUATED MEAs ACADEMY asout THREE

i

‘
i
; YEARS GO, 3 NEXIC IS FIRST POST. AEKICKs HAS ACCESS TO: |:
H
‘
t

REFERENTURA. FREQUENTLY ACCOMPANIES KAZANTSEV AMD YEVS

gue Oy

abernal to



--- Page 476 ---
BUTE O AMR OR AN TSS CE

Cuary to CS PUR WO.

SREP TO CF LENO. a

o LE RO O actumn to

“PAGE 5 MEXICO CITY 2565 SECRET
HAS MARITAL PROBLEHS DUE TO NEUROTIC WIFE AND FACT HE yas,

“BY FORNER WIFE, EIGHT YEAR OLD CHILD WHO HENTALLY RETARDED FROM

ot INFANTILE PARALYSIS,

- _DMIIRIY DYAKOXOV: = OF CENTRAL COMMITTEE CPSU. ;
FELIEVES HE AEKICK. HAS HALY FRIEXDS IN GOBERHACION AND RELACIONES
EXTERIORES. SERVED Iti ARGENTINA ALD BRAZIL. MORE REFINED AND

“INTELLIGENT THAN PRESENT CHARGE, KAZANTSEV, :

BORISKOLOMYAKOV: AEKICK REZIDEWT, THIRED_ IW IMPORT ANCE IN
EMBASSY. GRADUATE ACCOUNTANT, SERVED AS ACCOUNTANT IN USSR,

i
|
i
a.
}
i

| ARGENTINA “AND FIRST TOUR MEXICO. RETURNED TO MEXICO AS REZIDENT.
“VERY STRAIGHTFORWARD , STRONG PRINCIPLES. DRINKS MODERATELY.
“O.0SE, FRIENDSHIPS VITH ARGENTINE DIPLOMATS. FREQUENTLY TRAVELS «2:
WITH KAZARTSEV, SOMETINES WITH BeLSHAKOV. ;

YEVGENIY FEDIR: FOURTH IN IMPORTANCE IN EMBASSY.
FREQUE NILY WORKS. IN REFERENTURA, RAS FEW FRIENDS WITHIN EmBassy
BECAUSE oF FICKLE CHARACTER, AND FACT HE AT ROOT OF MANY INTERNAL .
_ IntRIGuzs sY SENDING ARONYHOUS ACCUSATORY LETTERS.

VALERIY NIKOLAYENKO: AEKICK. N CHARGE OF ASSIGNING
ae HOUSI RG AND FURNISHINGS. SPENT SIX HONTHS iN CUA AS ENFLOYEE,
a ; RATHER THAN | DIPLOMAT, BEFORE MEXICO. ATTENDED MFA ACADENY Ba)

a . NoScoW. .
bo. . .
re 2. FUP? 29f-835670. GP] Sten ah


--- Page 477 ---
eoon0o

ONG

|
i
i
i

MORAN Put YOR sat RECOWD
subECT =: Operation Rond Covrse ; ; .

Our memoranda catod 9 Rocenber 1939,
sane subject,

Honorandyt No, BeGO/474S, ehted 10-
Decenher 1909, pare oubjeet.

1, The Lollewing comm from CAS/UEX on Referoances
warded for your infomation, In an effort tod ontiry
», CAS/HEX obtained the following information Lror
a sources concorning the 3 and 4 Oatobor 1969 no
between Gubject and the Sovicts. . ;
. \

reposted the presence of certain

% Pmbasay on the worning of 4 October
the debricfing of Subject took placo,
sonee of pom. of theses Soviets have heen

co A, the eoues st of the ob-
ably one or moxe of thesa |
interview of Subject en 4

‘Bovk

Although the pre
reported provicusly in Ref
porvations could indicat tl
individunis was involved in the

October 1959,

a, Yevganty Ivanovich FYOIN was seen centering the Ene

bassy on 4 fobor at 0953 hows. Q wee feen Working in
Window #12, which is his and Yurdy ntorovich KUSTYANOV's
office. This offico is also uscd for reeciving VIP visitors.
PEDIN was goon exiting the ft 3 with MAkhaLl LAVIPOVSETY
and Lov GOLOUZOV at 1249 in an automobile carrying License

plates "83 Dn",

4. Roria Pavlovich NOLOH
Eubassy on 4 Octobe
XOV was obsorved ¢
KI gn the ga
tered tine main
1097 hours, ROLOMVS
ing with Valentin Serce

Ss ssen entering the
4 9 hours,

her ‘be apacsy : “then HOLGHYAS
uy th uel ins by the nada entren
i braved in the garden ‘epeake



--- Page 478 ---
14-0g000

pay

|
|

« ery
Seb e ee t
. wee poo vebaaaay 206
tuto the reeeiy
port,
during: one
Jett the xoon,
MS hours that
"69 DA." :
5, Veldisiny forgeyevich Ko
. eo Embassy at OO19 hours on 4 Octobcr in the.company of
SHUSURIEA, dixvang an tutonoblle with license "76 DD." .
ay than the coaversatiais 6 oned an parecrapa 4 above,
snot seen asain uatil 1 en he exited the Ene
y slong, It is not hnown when ROWSE the Labassy.
G, Ole Sexpeyevich LOLOTEY was n entering the En- .
. on 6 Octehox I nt 0240 hours dviving t eval-control
car a & Lloend criva senool, Th fund instrectox then
daparted.,  KoRoT od the nadin J budledng and wes
- t mnoarndn uptil 1045 hours, when ho c ited the Enbacsy
. Valentin Sergeyevich IOGINOV tas fon entering the
t oo40 h 3 the ZR Ootebir 1OG9., Ho was
tin 3 gy an his cay, tieonce plates "31 DG,"

i coon oxi
. at O815 hou 3 eon entering tho Lobas
0239 hourg an the x3 vehiel

ting again in cay "SL po"
brought to your attention bee
known KGB officers (exec
KGB), and ald have at least pas

again at
he yas coon
che abeve is
“a Soviets are
who As an Suspoct
bla English cpeaking ability.

of Convikh Tyiiovieh

@viver for car "3 DD," in
Soviet Dohancy on 4
votn Ivanov: KUuneEcoyt,
rds attached. Also at-
wova, wila

: &. Attached is a photo:
_ “KUZNETSOV, who might have hee
which Subject was smuggled out of the
October 1969, Sdnce his wife, Yous
miy have been with hin, hey pactecs

* : tached Isa photograph of Yevgenty
of Inva Federvich KLOKULOY, who naght be deéuntie Lwith the

wonan Tho t Subjeet at tho gatchouse as he entertd the En-

assy on 4 October.

9. With reference to the enexpency instructions for Sub-
ject on the Inst pee of Kets n,

4 orer CAS/ERE reports that
they were not bricfed concerndny; this emergepey ecans OF Cone

SECRET



--- Page 479 ---
14-0000

vat

Yor either
mission b

coordinated with CAS Reads s
10, Please ad if Subject was able te identity any
of the Goylet indivi Ys hs net, lindiny the photosra;
pWhich.we loaned to you causing our recting on 19 Bee
/ 1969, We woule else ap learning
to ddentity AusNcroy, CVA, and RHO ove yhose photo~
EYapbhs are attached,

2 that your o:

. Lh. Wiis rosues ffice réturn all photo.
geaphs of nae Bovicds co whieh have passed te you
proviou ad -photographs,
Attachnc

1 ~ Phote .

30 Photopvaph of K,

= : _ John C, Murray
. Chief, WH/1 - boy

DISTRIBUTION: 3
Orig. and 1 902 (w/att)

1 - SB/XAVH (for filing in AEMEAS TRO 201- -107668)
1 = SB/CI/0 .
- L-Ci/LI | a : :
. 1 - CI/ops : cee kee . . ‘
1 = 201-158926° (FEDIN) . ,
2m 201-749342 (SORMUSHKIND
wt - 201-28: 412 °

291-221169
201-837292
291526
291-S892878
Georpe tenpo i.le

4
SOV) (y/att 1&2)
|

Chrono : _ |
Hf

i

Hl

‘

LOVA) (w/att 2).
SE-1)

on on a}

(SCLEA,

ne et et et pe

WH/L:LNOsborno: lmr/SE4 d1st/ L974



--- Page 480 ---
1gyonn09

5 yr -

Notes from the Debricfing of AEMIDRIFE - 20 to 23 February 1970

199

+ . : 8, a 4

- ;

) , 19) Valentin ferpevevich LActnov: He left on the 6th of Sctcher for
*‘toscov, six ronths before the corpletion of hLy tour. He vas head

of .the consilar sdetion and the lover of Paya, “pparent ly the

causes fer his sudden return were 1) havire been Paya'ts lover; and 2)

not having had pood results fror his work and, according to Paya
t , cy . ,

Sore kind of failure, Ne was in “exico on two different occasions.

atentin

-She states that during the tine she was having an affair with Vv:
|

LACTROV, who vas chief of the consular section, he occasionally took mo

: ; : ;

her out at night to places where she knows he made contact vith persons
: :

who seered ta he Mexicans. She Says that she. doesn't know with which

persons he wade contact, nar af they tere “exicans or net, hecause she

never sav then, hut that he, on several eccasions took her to these

places: the Cine “od on bisax Lomas de Tecamachalco, the Cine Futurama

he em ana eet ets

in Colonia Lindavista, the drive-in theater called *utocinena del Valle,

: - the drive-in called Autocinera Satelite and the Cine Tlalteloléo. . Khen

SIRT be Eo ate

she accorpanied him to those places, he left the car aud she remained

in it; that he would po for 10, 15 or. 20 ninntes to converse vith those

people. He never told her vho these persons vere nor what they talked

,

about .: . . . : mo

i

.
4

ns


--- Page 481 ---
14-0000

yao

Senter mee

“S Ssienaer os
ASHES CSB o When Filied i)

AUV ENCE couy Cc nro & ROTTED

woeer “ter “Use

SUAIEEY To CB POE MO. ——4 My

AREF TO C8 ME NO,

DENCE

so EY

Ost By LY

RTE CRA /

= s SECRE. 12217152. FEB 70 CITE MEXICO city 2539 CPRALLETT ACT ING)
xe _JEDIATE DIRECTOR. Doe, oe
; CESENSYHIZED REDTOP AENIFRIFF FSPAST IME” oe : Uke ze, 304g
cs REF MEXico ciTY fasii\More re 2 mo
‘de DEDRIEFER REPORTS SLOY BUT STEADY PROGRESS WITH AEM IERIFF,
~. Wio Beerwnrnc To ACCEPT DEBRIEFER AS ‘FRIEND, LITEMPO-14 TAKING
LEAD IN DEBRIEFING (WHICH AEMIDR IFF SEEMS PREFER AT THIS POINT),
i _ WITH DEBRIEFER cHImine In OCeASIONALLY AS “INTERPRETER”. SINCE
: — SPANISH IS COMMON LANGUAGE TO ALL THREE, Most IF NOT ALL OF DEBRIEFING
: WILL BE IW SPAN{SH. L-IA, WHO HANDLING AEMIDRIFF VERY WELL AND” WHO
_ VERY AMENABLE TO ALL SUGGESTIONS FROM DEBRIEFER, IS Ta TH CORPLETE “|
- NOTES AND IS DICTATING woTES onto TAPE. FIRST TAPE vol emai BETWG TRAN Fie Tangy

~

BRIBED. WILL CABLE HIGHLIGHTS. _
wt . wae ———
"TL Be AS OF EVENING 20 ‘FEBRUARY, AEHIDRIFF HAD STARTED nef
“4, THRU PHOTOS oF SOVIET PERSOWREL WITH DEBRIEFER “AND L-14.;
READING IS THAT AEMIDRIFF HAS NO KROWLEDSE 1HTEL scr 8 oR, “convlers
_" AWD PROBABLY LITTLE IN WAY OF OPS LEADS, HOWEVER, SxE SHOUD BEG ay
ic ———
ADLE CONTRIBUTE SIGHIFICANTLY TO IN-DEPTH KNOULEDGE OF soviteT ‘NISSIOW
a

; MEXICO CITY, ~ oe : _ yee

“y : . KT eee
é 3. AEMIDRIFF IN GOOD spiRIts AND ADJUSTING WELL, Bur iN: SOMEWHAT
. Beth DAY
a POOR HEALTH, WITH COLD, FEVER ‘BLISTERS, AND INTESTINAL PROBLEMS: CFOR™
: a2 Dees. Paid
. . - e oe pel: pisces
‘ a ; SECRET ; pusuitl

: ™ 7 . ee COPY.



--- Page 482 ---
por

faniad we saemfan ayn Deicas adhd dhathendestteded tyine wees
Be dT ROTTS SECRET Lt paver
@nour t
; [~ SECREF Loe.
oy Cihen Fi Hed In) Bron
a
AdvaNCE Cony Tver Cave RE PRODUTTION CF THIS CORY PRONIGITED

worn (ra Ono

CLARREY TO CB PRE NO.

ne \ | en
KRACK TO CORRE wo. —

is} FRE RD a ACTUAN TO - a enaien

. PAGE 2 MEXICO cry 2539.56 CRED. ee
a wach SHE HAS HEDICINE «: aan . ——

_ 4, RE PERSONAL HISTROY,  AEMIDRIFF, SAID SHE Arsep- BY Fan ILy ‘0
GERMAN-SPEAKING UKRAINIAN JEWS. WAS MEMBER KONSOMOL FROM AGES 14 To
28. SHE. THEN LEFT KONSOMOL AND. CLA ns, SHE DID NOT JOIN cont UN IST
PART! BECAUSE. SHE. “MARRIED” NUCLEAR PHYSICIST NAMED MIKHAIL ALE KSAND*
ROVICH ALEKSANDROV, WHO DIED.AT.AGE 28 1 1967.” ACTUALLY “MARRIAGE
“Not OFFICIAL: SINCE MIKHAIL" s MOTHER. WAS” OPPOSED, Bur EVERYONE KNEW
THEY LIVED TOGETHER. GERMAN was. AENIDRIFF"S MAIN LANGUAGE AT ;

ey

1
a hat ad
5

Bowie f

my ee

UNIVERSITY (SHE now CAN READ Bur NOT SPEAK. 1, ALSO READS. FRENCH AND
KNOWS: SOME ENGLISH WORDS). GOT. JOB wit MINISTRY OF FOREIGN TRADE,
AND: THRU INFLUENTIAL “FRIENDS MADE. THERE GOT TRAVELLIS ASSIGNNENTS

i AFTER DEATH OF MIKHAILs WENT TWICE To LEIPZIG, ONCE TO EAST BERL Thy
AND ONCE TO COLOGNE “EOR Stx Dayss. "SAYS: SHE HAD WANTED TO CONE TO :
MEXICO SINCE TINE, TEN YEARS AGO, WHEW SHE HEARD MEXICAN “SINGERS: WHO _ sores

sie eenete eke nen ne NE pt B EE A

APPEAR ING moscov.

i 5. AEMIDRIFF SAID SHE WENT "AROUND. WITH “AED IEHARD “ALL THE
ae : TIME” UNTIL HIS RECALL, BUT SAYS THAT RECALL WAS Nor CAS USED BY
THIS AFFAIR. “AED IHARD was RECALLED DUE TO SOME "FIASCO" WHICH
. OCCURRED | ABOUT THREE: NONTHS PRIOR TO RECALL. AEM IDR IFF CLAIMS
“Oe ‘ TO KNOW rt betars. EARLIER STATEMENT THAT “HE wad BEEN RECALLED

cele HN pattem mn dented we ae!

- . oe ot 7 geerer



--- Page 483 ---
See Ape metenneses some comms aia ae of Manvel AEA HAS AAR NE

ADO WRUNG OM nat eR ARENA ienstraseapaninen aateaa saeu

Lege

SS =
es SECRET

2M. (hen Filled Int ESSEST

AEN ANCE seer Jsuee Cacrreo

woe: Dre (Jno

“| exasney vo cs meno. |

mace ro csr

O mead’ G reruns: ro:

PAGE 3 HEXICO city 2539 SECRE t
BECAUSE OF HER ‘was APPARENTLY: weal NT 19. BE JOKE,

6 AEMIDRIFF DID NOT. START GOING out WITH URUEWA AND FRIENDS ©
UNTIL AFTER AEDIEHARD DEPARTURE. | SHE. now seers HAVE NO DESIRE SEE -

j UREUNA, WH
PLANS, BUT “SEEMED HAPPY. To LEAR SHE NIGHT. BE ABLE STAY AT. SAFESITE

THRU END FEBRUARY,
7 7 DEBRIEFER. BEL FEVES” AEMIDRIFF Is. ESSENTIALLY APOLITICAL.

BACK AT PRESENT OW SOME PERSONAL THINGS. ©
By No SECURITY PROBLENS ENCOUNTERED IN SnFesiTe AREAS
9. FILE 201- 835670. GPrt ee
SECRET

SECRET

é BELIEVES RAN OUT: oN HER. SHE VAGUE ABOUT FUTURE 7 :

SHE PROBABLY TELLING ALL, OR NEARLY aL ri “KNOWS, PERHAPS HOLD ING ,

a ee RE ES

4
ae
:
:
-



--- Page 484 ---
Sevbe see ETARIAG MiSminaTiod ALA IFITO MESSnon
Rin ueT boii Ae
ror) "Wa"

ADVICE COPY Clowes . terreo

aes eas = 1
S ag Kegs" = YD

PECTION onsjoF THo™

SHE WAS RAISED BY
Ss 1s WARRIRD SISTER” BORG ABOUT - 1959. SUBJECT STUDIED: LINGUIS STics

eA mAs

REF: HEXICO CITY easel oa

| 12°F EBRUARY BY LIVERPO-14.

2. SUBJECT WAS BORN 1939 (31 AUSUST PER IMMIGRATION DOCUNENT) . ut

OTHER DIED IN CHILDBIRTH. FATHER WAS SWGIREER WORKING FOR Tk

TLITARY . PROJECT, WAS ACC
a

worm C}vss (jas . . - “fel oa
cLamry to . a: AEC fe y mi
| xasy to ce ne ES Wer Piss:

soa)

1, FOLL OWING IS GIST oF DEBRIEFING ‘OF AENIDRIFF EVENING :

te ¢ GOVERNMENT VHOVLN 1943, WHILE E WORKING id
wt rn ems

. HOTAL COrica f

SE one eT 1419052 FEE 7¢ cite 1 HExIco “CITY

Taw FACTORY ow

2 2 i LLETT acTINe)

 WasHa

.

GIRLFIREND OF “HER FATHER AND Oi LY RELATIVE: m0

AND GYuhastics ar UNIVERSITY oF Woscod. WARRIED (DATE NOT STATED)

Se

SS

| “FIGURE. AFTER “Rus ;BAND'S beaTH, “SuadEC CF WOR
SUSJE ct Sale ‘Sue ACQUALITED STH Ui

ner

RAKED AS VuTERPRETER

AaL TIES AT LEIP2ZI6 FAIR, Has also” BEEN IW EAST BERLIN,
TRE -iSLATOR RECENTLY |

Pol, DISSEM

BEST

-o &

cs copy.

WIEHAIL Luu wo, was STUDENT OF “PHYSICS and eaTH re UNIVERSITY oF are
SCC. HUS3AND Died 1367 As RESULT OF RADIAT Lous RECEIVED In”
dRiNEWTS. SUBJECT WAS In COLOGNE, vist “GEAHANY, aT THAT. TINE,
WANING AS AIDE AND HITERPRETER FoR SOVIET SCIENTIST oR LITERARY

MOUTNG ANDI Tashan OF

SES YI



--- Page 485 ---
|

Soa mui . GAT o excuse 8
; ° SEChEG sites epee

—_— (hen Filled tab “Sige

INDET: Ors” Dns

Chativy To'c8 PRE NO,

BREE TO COLE NO

Pace 2 NEXICO CITY 2472 5 SECRE ET. _ OS
ARRESTED FOR, ESPIORASE (ALEXANDER Ve TTANS SHIROV) « HET att IN.
NOSCOW WHEN HE VAS STUDYING AT INSTITUTS OF FORZIGN RE aTTOHs. a
THIS TINE SHE WORKING FOR AINISTRY OF FOREIGN TRADE, IN ADJACHET -
Bur LbdIie, TIKHOWIROV HAD REPUTATION OF BELaS OZ OF BEST. -
TRANSLATORS OF Hig TINE. ; ee
€. SUBJECT EARNS 2529 pesos ¢2ea uso» Ps > MOUTH PLUS.
SMALL QUANTITY RUBLES DEPOSITED iN Roscoe, STATED SHE HEVER-HAD -
OR HOLDS OW TO MONEY BECAUSE, SHE. ALWAYS LIXED TO BUY NICE THINGS.
Se EVER SINCE ARRIVAL. 18 NE ex1c6 SUEJZCT KAS SEEN REPRIMANDED
; @R TASTES WHICH VERE “OUTSEDE EWBASSY ORK", AZOVE ALL IW

sORAL| QUESTIONS, BUT ALSO FoR DYE ING HEK RAIR, VEARING PANTS,
AWD NOT BUYTUG SANE CLOTKES: cnBasey WIVES USUALLY BouGKT. see
Bad FOLLONTS + snonat PROBLEMS: : ys

a WE n0 o cousuLar szetrou

: A SHE ¥aS WISTRESS OF FOR



--- Page 486 ---
.

en ttre

ADVANCE COPY C)itwee D)acrseo

_THTERROGRATED BUT DID NOT WANT TO REVEAL WITH HON SHE HaD-

~ NIKITIN REALIZED THAT Hs WAS Gore TO LE PUNISHED HE DENIED
_ Cor PLETELY THAT HE HAD™ BE Nv WITH HER THAT WEEKEND,

pass. SECRETANIAY Dusessnarion , CUASSIFIEOMEsace TOTAL. Curses

Ee

bore (vee Dro
CLARIFY To €8 rE. HO

“RAEP TO €9 LENO,

PASE 3 MEXLCO c1Ty 2472. s : CR E Tt
POLICE TO HELP LOOK, WHEN. SKE RETURRED SHE WAS: THOROUGHLY

GONE, ALEXANDR HLKITIN Took THE RAP, SAYING KE HAD’ BEEN |

WITH HER, FOR THIS REASON SHE WAS NOT PUNISHED BADLY,
ALTHOUGH SHE WeS THREATEWED WITH G13 SENT HOKE. WHEN ~

& SUBJECT MET URvENA AEQUT OUE YEAR AGO AT PARTY elven BY"

HER FORKER CHIEF CVIKTOR TVAIOV,, WHOR SUBJECT DESCRIBED AS VERY ~

NICE PERSON WHO LOVED To GIVE PARTIES” Aad Huo HAD HANY EXICAN
: CONTACTS) « Shy URUSIA FREQUENTLY ASHE Ri ESENTED nexIoaW FIRM
DEALING. WITH conitzReTAL OFFICE (SGROC I). alt MER cow Tacts WITH.

. HEXICAN FRIEWDS WERE MADE THROUGH URUZitA. (SUBJECT BIATED SHE

MET MANY OTHER ! MEXICANS, WHOSE Wa 35. Ske Dogs NOT RECALL, Iu HER
FR ZQUENT VISITS TO HUSEUNS, TigatéRs, ‘AitD (OTHER PUBLIC PLACES,
Ssoustines THESE MEXICARS wouLD PICK HER uP aiiD BRING HER HONE, -
ALTHOUGH | “SHE. HEVER, TOLD THEt: HER wat HE Qi occuPATIoN.) THROUGH

URUENA SUBJECT WET “GRouP oF FREE- SPENDIEG. ‘(ouTHS, maWY: OF SPANISH

BACKGROUND cas Is UE Aud SHE = avoven GOING OUT WITK THEN,

AID Ske HAD ALAS 58 W FREES SPIRIT who DID WOT LIKE THE

. SECRET



--- Page 487 ---
;
'
j
H
i
i
!
}.
j
i
H

Ceortc:

ADVANCE COPY (Cleweo

 peBita ar Oxo

SUASUPY To CB PEE KD.

BNR YO C8 PILE WO
O rae mm () rerun ro

MEXICO city 2472 s E c RE Ev. .
RESTRICTIONS cust onany Ww HER ‘couNTHY “hi , ; ener one fue wouLD
OFTEN 60. To a BEHIND THE. BACKS OF NER EMBASSY AND ‘HER

: CHIEFS, It was Id THIS WAY SHE BEGAN To €0. OUT WITH, URUENA AKD, ©

HIS GROUP, SHE SAID THAT, HER CHARACTER Kad “ALUAYS BEEN A LITILE |
ADVENTUROUS AND AT TIHES CAUSED HER PROBLENS, (LITEMPO=14 COMMENTED
TRAT FROM HER CONVERSATION: IT CLEAR SHE IS GIRL OF " NOT VERY STRICT
NOR AL conpucT." on THE, ‘CouTARY, SHE IS WOHAN WHO. ENJOYS” CONTACT

WITH MALES VERY MUCH.) -
7. SUBJECT DECIDED STaY iil NEXICO WHEN SKE LEARNED SKE To

BE SENT HOE 8 FEBRUARY CORIGINAL DATE WAS 4 FEBRUARY). LEARNED

THIS FROM MALE COLLEAGUE, (THUS FAR UNIDENTIFIZD) WHO AS DRUNK,

DOES NOT NOY IF COLLEAGUE TOLD NER OUT CF KINDNESS OR DRUNK NUZSS. —

SKE 18 TURN TOLD URUEWA WHO SAID KE WOULD FIND HELP, SAID KE COULD

WOT HELP PERSONALLY BUT WOULD GIVE HER KEYS TO HIS APARTHEUT. .

ON 6 FESRUARY SHE SUSPECIzD PROVOCATION WHZtl, AS SHE ENTERED:

LOCAL PHARHACY, TNO WONEL APPROACHED HER PROPOSING THAT SHE RESALW

8 HEXICO, ROT KHOUING wOY THESE WOAEN COULD KNOW THAT SHE was

ETURWING, SRE SUSPECTED THAT THE’ Wor: Ea RAD BEEN SENT BY HER

“EMBASSY » PARTICULARL Y SIwce shi haa JUST "SEEN FIRST. SECRETARY

THAD Le OE RR

ee . MeReRer

"aoRis" PROBABLY KOL Oi! YALOV, POSSTE ELY ChEYEOVD « BORIS Had co


--- Page 488 ---
: _ ;
Sell VEUMETAR AY wtSo ean ATION LAsait ILO MESoAuG 1OTAL COMea _- MOU Tom ANO-OA litt? tagS- Stn OT
§ —

FGnacGer wanna

: eee
ADVANCE omy — Cnorren

: . woom C)ves (no
CLAtuPY To C8 Po NO.

——— |

ovr an

WACP TO C8 MLE NO,

Cy rae ac © acryan ro

PAGE 5 MEXICO CITY 247¢ 5 ECRE

h ALWAYS GREETED HER “AFFECTIONATELY” BUT THIS TIME =, OW SEEING. HER,
HE IGNORED. HER. OW 7 FEBRUARY SHE AGALii ASKED URUEWA FOR. HELP, ~ ;
SAYING iF HE ‘DID HOT THERE WAS 00 dAY OUT-- ‘EITHER Shz RETURNED

TO SOVIET ‘UNTON AWD Surrence couseQUENcES, OR SHE. Cox et 1TTED SUGIDE

LIN WEXICO, URUSIIA TNEN INTRODUCED KEA 10 OE RICARDO FIERRO, WHO :
< HID HER For TYO DAYS. (STATION ConMEAT: TRIE VERSION OF SEQUENCE 7 I
> OF EVENTS APPEARS SoNcWHAT GARBLED, ADDITIONAL DETAIL RE ACTUAL 4
ESCAPE CAtig IN COUVERSATTON WITH FLUTZO JKEN SUBJECT SAID SHE HAD L
RECEIVED PERMISSION TO GO TO FeREVELL PARTY 7: FEERUERY. PARTY :
VAS IW APARTHEUT Ia VHICK SHI TOOK , ue ‘ '
8. SINCE DEFEZCYIOu rena ,
“WHO YAS DUE TO RETURH FROF 120 !
, FEBRUARY. RICAKvO FIERRO WAS, EL =
: 9, URUZHA’S SISTER aR, GK For egaztaa “eee,”
"CALLED SUBJECT YHEG SHE LEAR ~
FRO COMMERCIAL OF FIG: consis a
LITENPO“12 PER PARAL WEXICU CI
Bad BER KILLED as 3e saad risston ches — .

DAHTEL WOusTEL ClO EAS FOR 13 YeriSe

EcRET..


--- Page 489 ---
.

* “oreo ov

0 worrer

eee ee

REPRODUCTION OF THIS COPY PRONIMITED

ADVANCE Cony lane
moses C)vae (xo

SCLASRPY TO CB PILE NO, SS ee TE
ovr an, .

mnar ro CoE MO

a, PER O meno 0 nerunn ro BANE

“Page 6 MEXICO CITY 2472 SEGRE tr

49, CONFRONTATION OF SUBJECT IN GOVERNACION WAS ATTENDED
“BY OLEG NECHIPORENKO, CHARGE BORIS KALAUTSEV, AND ONE OTHER. ‘SOVIET:
(IDENTITY NOY CLEAN). SUBJECT STATED ALL THREE SPOKE To HER
NICELY, SAYING THAT IF SHE HEEDED ANYTHING SUCH AS MOHEY OR CLOTHING,
TREY WOULD SEND It TO KER, THEY W2h NER FRIENDS ARD WERE ONLY
TRYING TO HELP HER, BUT AT EWD OF. EXTERVIEY WHEN SKE SaID THAT
SHE WAS RENAIWING lit KEXICO AND IT Was BEITER THAT THEY FORGOT

_ ABOUT HER, KAZANTSEV TOLD HER THAT, “THE LONGER. SHE STAYED THE WORSE

IT WOULD BE FOR MER WHE SHE RETURNED.”
“Le FILE: 201-835678, ;
SECRET :



--- Page 490 ---
_DISPATCH i ee ===

REVERERCHS: ‘A. BWA 37833, 12 September 1969
~. Be Eigse s7638, 30 Oetober 1969

‘1. Fhe tvo peréonality Assessuent Questionnaires on AEDLESARD
which Were traasaitted ae separate. cover attachments: to Reference
_ A wero anfortunstely. aot Feceived until 30 September, by which
date we. knew from a visa cable sent the State Department by the
Bobasay. co City that AEDIEZHARD was departing PCB ene week

. thereafter “7 October. /Refezenco B ‘confirmed ‘that departure,

2. Binco bat: one week was: ‘available for: the completion ef
the HECRUSH asesssrent, and itd transmittal to the Station, we.
decided not to go ahead with it. The PAQ's have been made a part .
of AEDIEHARD’s file, and should he appear in tho future outside
the USSR, an assessuent can be mado at that timo,

Norma ¥. LETCHWORTH

Distribution:
3-003, Hexico City

OSS REHRBKE n GRSPATCH SVMABOL AND WUMEER

_ ‘WW 17572
GRATION

BECRET

* | eed eras | 7
PAL Z Deedee ed Ot. |

a a a 7 | DISPATCH

coe ro ceener eneemnmnnetton ie POCA emma tr £2 AMEN FO ee, ee eerie a nines eee nme ecm



--- Page 491 ---
14-0000

DIRECTOR 27630, 7 August 19690
IRE reported the PCS arrival in Mexico City of the

de ob L é a : of the
MAZORIN family of 20 October 1969 aboard Air France flight 707 frou’
New York City. Subject travelled on Soviet Diplomatic Passport
D-027106 and his vifé, Lidiya Petrovna, and son, Andrey, travelled
"on Boviet Diplomatic Passport D-027106, = : . .

‘2, Pex Reference cable, Subject vas scheduled to replace
Valentin Sergeyevich LOGINOY (201-285412). Subject will be
replacing LOGINOV in slot but apparently not in position. Oleg
_Maksimovich NECNIPORENKO (201-305870) was introduced at LOGINOY's

_ -farewoll reception at the Soviet Eabassy as LOGIZCY'a successor
= @@ “Head of the Consular Section." Since ve do not havo passport
coverage on Air F¥ance flights, we were unable to obtain Bubject's
passport, which would indicate his title. : :

= 3. ‘Bubject was escorted into ‘the Soviet Eubassy on his first
day in Kexico by NECHIFORENKO, :

4. Photographs and further information on Subject will be

an forwarded when received, .
: 5. A 201 number fcr Subject is requested.

1
1
i
fo
i
t
:
i

Distribution: -
2 - C/SB

54-Qate _ 2 fo |

: _1+¢,
US OCPY FEO IK

DG . .
30 October 1969
ma



--- Page 492 ---
/ . Secret ~ ~ —
. : (WHEN FILLED IND ow, se)
ar re, eee, =
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET . ~
INSTRUCTIONS :

__10; ACTION BRANCH _

1. Fill in Sect. 2 on a bac :
and forward to RID. U fle no. and title shown are not proper,
2. Destroy front cover sheet, unless it records insert proper file no. below and forward
significant action taken orgnmments requit- document to RID/AN.
ing preservation.
FROM: pane PROPER FILE NO.

RID? )

TO: ALL ADORESSEES .
FILL IN SECTION 1 ON BACK. IF APPROPRIATE

BN we me wie 0S yjo7¥

oper ep enna ornare renee gmearye @
UTES Paterna ate



--- Page 493 ---
1400000 | 3

Ber oe cides aus

FSI DOCUMENTS LANDING CARDS
TE: 47 OCTOZER 1969
CLASSIFICATION: NONE GIVEN

SUNECT: LosINov, vALENTEN s.


--- Page 494 ---
a SE a:
. : rE
ona: Charles V, Belt . : —
ver WH/L 3EO4 yb Aw SECRET
| or 6954/9041 :

H care: 16 October 1969 _ .

- wae

"ROUTING ANO/CA INTOALS JsLIN OY

“Wetesaificstlony . (ete end tine Hlted) — ; (relerence eambery
_. SHECO-R-E-T Co : cieomecton
WTB age greg - 47256¢ -
™ © vexreo erry a 7 AL586 5
REDLEG AEDIEHARD AEKICK : ‘ a oe :

"+ “s NATIONAL AGENCIES PENDING.

-nuuea

REF: A) MEXICO CITY-1638 AIN 62539) *
: B) DIRECTOR-14106, 21 JUNE 69** |

1, SUBJECT OF REF ASSIGNED 201-853538. Sorane 4 Sebo).
2, REF B ADVISED NO RECORD SUBJECT, RETRACES UNDEI.
".NAME VARIATION IN PRQ NEGATIVE. COVERT NANE CHECKS WITH : :

UNDER CSI-F-10-5, PARA As. PRIMARY EMPHASIS SHOULD BE ON.
‘SUBJECT’ S- RELATIONSHIP WITH AEDIEHARD (201- 285412) WHO HAS
_BEEN CULTIVATING SUBJECT SINCE FEBRUARY 69. _ SUBJECT EVIDENTLY |

ATTRACTIVE TO AEKICK ON BASIS WIDE RANGE OF CONTACTS AMONG |
". PROMINENT MEXICANS, -° ”

FILE: 201-853538; 201-285412

END OF MESSAGE

SOORDINATING OFFICER
SECRET anarte ‘
REPRODUCTION 6Y OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE IS PROHISITED. Comna >:

CSLAASING OFMCEA . AUDHNTICATING

OFNICEA

3. STATION ‘IS REQUESTED TO CONTINUE PROCESSING CASE Soe



--- Page 495 ---
14-0000

aa

“3 wer ssace fon sour
fo TOTAL COPHS:

Teo AND/OA Farting Lace BY

lent mo

Own Ono woes DC serunn ro ———_— nance

| (1) vine wn es rug no.

i .
Getorente cumber;

Cite DIRECTOR YE 6.
7

‘Hoate end tle tiled)
PAGE TWO

WH Comment: *Request. Headquarters and National Agencies traces.

*#4#Forwarded early Headquarters traces.

i Mes, > ¢koPs/Wit Fi khedt 24 a AR
WILLIAM V2 BROE : 4) .
¢/WwHD CI/0A hall y cH)
; Ee =

8

8

us

: 8

fo . .

: : Cocrninana oFrrcens .

i : ReLaaaena oFnes> . : fateeed bree enceetty RY TSNT re ATS
. ~ : "SECRET Pataca tony were

ia 4 ° ~

b . BEPROOUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE 1S PROHIBITED. con AO
¥ . : :



--- Page 496 ---
.

CIASSIFICATION: UNCLASSIFIED

SUAJECT: VISAS SOSSH VALENTIN LOGUINOV..

: . .
: "
= q . .

Se oe at re RE

aac beomsicibatac sin 3s

Et WOES Sn Oe


--- Page 497 ---
- 2 nem, Tem, . /. ee RB
ee ~~ __f J ne
a 7 CASRUATION FROCK YN ACHON

Aneto Foe exis

19

Chief, Sl) Division AX
(ory . ont uaa Ose
Chief WH Diviaton CAN RIDGE WNOLING

hiol of Station

REDTOV AEKICK
Valentin Sergeyevich LOGINOV 4291-280812),
IActeoo REQUIRID - RsLRLNCLS
7 1. Subject, accompanied by his wife, Aleksandra Dmitriyevna,
and son, Dmitriy, departed. Mexico City Pes on 7 October 1969, They |
travelled to New York via Air France flight 700, From New York
. they would fly Aeroflot to Moscow, ©

,
2, Subject and his wife were honvred by several going--away
parties, one of which was given on 1 October at the Soviel Embassy,

Le 3. fubject stated several times before he left that he hoped
that he would return to México and said that there was a good
chance he would come back. . an

4. Subject introduced ote. Maks imovich NECHIPORENKO (201-305870)
as his replacement as Chief of the Consular Office of the Soviet
imbassy. .Subject replaced NECHIPORENKO as Vice~Consul when he
arrived PCS in August 1965,

5. We do pot have any information as yet as to the arrival
: of Anatoliy Sergeyevich MAZURIN (201 ), who according to
a DIRECTOR 27630, 7 August. 1969, is scheduled to replace LOGINOV,

6. Forwarded herewith is ‘transit visa information as well as
copies of the passports used by a adi his Wire.

Vw a hon vl o Doe

for/gonn A. PROBERT

Attachment;
Passport and visa h/w

Diggribut ion:
G2 C/SB w/att hfe
io aa C/N w/o att

26990 ¢ HMMA 37928 _10_Ortaber 3960
ARAN aa Baad

SE.¢


--- Page 498 ---
“pple S atoncten que la Bmbajada de los Estados Unidos de

La Bmba jada, ae la Unién.de RepGdlicas Socialie~
tas Soviéticas” saluda: muy atentamente a la Babajada a

de los Bstados Unidos de América y-tiene el honor de

Bolicitar que se sirva extender ‘las vieos de tr&nsi-~
diplomfiticos del Sr. VALENTIN

to en los pasaportes |
LOGUINOV, Tercer Seeretario de la Embajada de la UkSS
VALEXANDR A LoGuINova, con el =

en México, 8u esposs SF

hijo DMITRI. |
Las persgnus mencionadas salen de México a Nueva

asa Zz 7 de octubre ve 1969 por la Cla “Airc bem

York el

nee"
df£a 10 de octubre por la Cla “scroflot",

a Bmbajada de la URSS agradece de antemano la

69 América ténga a bien de prestar a este ‘golicitud y
aprovecha | la oportunidad para. reiterar las segurida-
des ge su" "mas alta ¥ distinguida Sonsideracién. ii.

: voxieo,D.F. 30 de septienbdre de 1969.

A LA EMBAJADA DE LOS BSTADOS
UNIDOS DE. ANERICA

MICROFILMED
OCT 23 159

SOc. micro. sxr.

- ? ;
os 3 ‘ "
Bhe arit os eaPy ey
rn a2 5 tN : gay PHA

y Van a continuar su viaje rumbo a Mosea el : :

om



--- Page 499 ---
eo . a, " , :
. : : .
‘ 2 hog . -
- : .

x). lend we
> a by te daoad

PLOLA ¥ LUGAR DE-NACMENTO mts ano
Hose er et 124524

RueaiiON T rroroniO Of KuTANCin dN Ce EOS.

RARSTEO ’ Z- S. E. 63 a
: oY
Bisends eet bo prvcude to nt trp'en te entcate ot partes ol evade de acto @ tt CLV, 0 ttogye al poet i :
0 inadeaite .
tentials wt Epa pee te, unr cit daca Eran in cnennde “|
oer al yet carrey camgiets agin ar tebe ¢ enteric. af
GB etictorte tol ewtrerstade per oo y re tebraned tes loots 82-oL wesneD, . a +4
a : a Noe ane 1
: H
Ge Bt pine . 7 . &
——— te ag 257 7 .
ile ih poe an as Bin rs ug
. eo
, i
: : no
ie, i 5 ’
. “ ny
. g .
. . . -
: . ’ .
. .
. om é .
° °
. oa
. ’ ,
.
Ad .
.
. ,
. .
. . .
. . . *
, ~ i



--- Page 500 ---
14-0000

us

Pave .
. PECHA F LUGAR Ot NACIMIENTO:
: uo detos

ts meteiaite:
1, care ea tn hdtrmenide gun Ryute fe prsaate icin, actesie eaten Scere,

ee oly oe corecte y compiate place ter 7 ante
Dsetieianta tof extreunds por mtg



--- Page 501 ---
ow

COIO3 COBETCKMX
COUNAAHCTHY BCKHX


--- Page 502 ---
. " pexeasnréme cero, spaxqan. 2S Zcowsa couerckit:
Souwatuctuaee rns PECHYBANK.

M COSA ©.
covere HX coustaucriMEcKHx PEchys ats

7 Mnancreperne HOST pannsex flex npocit Bce Fpaaxaancnst: hi nocuiers : :

amactn CCCP i: Aryxectacinx Pocyzapera nponyckats Gecnpenxretacuud
BAadeAYA HACTOAUera HacHoOpra Ht OKAILIBATH eMy BeNYecKoe cogeiieraine,

Drcacpr zetcrourerew x3”

Srwcranesy Meauempa
“Hnocmpawutic Ze. CCER

foe


--- Page 503 ---
DES REPUBLIQUES SOVIETIQUES SOCIA

. Le titulalre du priscnt, cltoyen.... de LUNLON

. ~ AU NOM DE VUNION : .
DES REPUBLIQUES SOVIETIQUES SOCIALISTES

“La Ministére des Affaires Etrengdres ‘pric toutes les autorités civile:

et militaires de PURSS et des Pays Amis de faisser passer libremert
te titulairé du présent passeyort et de lu! aécorder alde et protection en

. as.dz besoin,

appléant-da Ministre ~~
2s Affaires Etrangéres de FURSS
Pour traduction conform

Tratectes, 0”

LISTES |

.!
A
3
7
-
*y
4
fe
--


--- Page 504 ---
Ormetin 0 ponent! nacnopTa Renoavelteaeat.
CpoK nactoaucro nacnopta apoaacn
TRO yy neeesss see avasecencnenensnannnanennnnenessen .

Le astal du présent passcport cst profongs

Jusqs'au

| Cpox Hacroarpers aachopsa opoaacu:
19. esas a 8
at gu présent pacscport est profongé ~
“snnien renee WQrn one
1



--- Page 505 ---
114-0000

Sou

os
. * mintonsyuaccias BUSA
Y25 Oo E PRS LF.
‘ : Adages D6 te
. . eicrare A aA ayeaw no ccep .
-_ , : f fete
to Dabora Ulllizarse. antes” Lela
. OR, 7 a del da s-< ; an
. . : a . =
: ” Rosea, uli os A
AOE
+



--- Page 506 ---
44-0000

605 ,

. .
‘
. ° .
: an .
. Basu, Visas ie ,
oo Fieomario CI PIPLONA TIER OPLOMATIC
, Hei afi
. Onedtwa teansit(sy +
tae . Do :
i x.
. .


--- Page 507 ---
14-0000

506

a)

SOT AO ped ttc mee Fame at

of os

nee
Body

iN BE

tia
“Beng Visas

HELA MHONES |

AL DOL chy

. ney HOS

ey Tentones

an ORAL



--- Page 508 ---


--- Page 509 ---
Name netny

eioeacs avast

ae atead ee

v? 3
. ;
. DELOMATIONL] DITO, iD

thn w8e elmer doe:
Yeti for enatwo rasa)

: . MWe LES

ts i

val

VISA ES nate” !
“aerial frone eves fet INE
Sommaire rresintfor’

Dt wa! dew arenes,

Cr
Bindadeoin,  temped



--- Page 510 ---
14-0000

S04 _ | 8

. De ee ee Tn & :
: 406 6» Woedns 2 PSO. E/0. a

pres dee ae sree

. tira ten thy sent er erntanngrotgporiveeen
. “per aly os cece g compte sega eu saber y eclonte,

Sette eben pay m tl a an ws pen
“a ~~

——. te
inten pT Coc de tm EO Bed FS-257 sary be aeagrs ‘

rarer

suf or Gir.



--- Page 511 ---
DES REPUBLIQUES

a SOVIETIQUES SOCIALISTE

BR Ne ors

TET ae Onna cnenaestht eaten, AE


--- Page 512 ---
a
1
!
i
i

Mee

t
- .

| Hipcanauureis cero, tana -COW3A CORETEK HX ot
CONMAAHCTHMECK HX PECRYBAKK . «

t
: Minucreperao Mnocrpansuax AD Bpocur ace Ppaqancnne ws Doenuue
. Mu CCCP 33 Apyrxecrechnux Tesynxre Bpoayenars Gs, RPONATCTBCHHO f ?
. 7 delta HastoRurero MAacKepTA Wt oxaastbaTe exty BCANeeNeS Coreficrane, © t
i + . ee ve i
wet Sanecmumess Masooar . : +
| Maoempannsc Bea axe: . é o
.
: . .
’ -
. . . .
. . ;
.- . :



--- Page 513 ---
i

Sth Gate ete eee eee wees

: re Teaestton,
. an Ls tltulatre du présent, cltoyen22 de LUNION |
uc DES REPUBLIQUES SOVIETIQUES SOCIALISTES

. Se rend A Métranger

. . AY NOM DE UUNION | _
Lo. DES REPUBLIQUES SOVIETIQUES SOCIALISTES

Le Ministare des Affaires Etrangéres prie toutes tes autorités civites : f

‘et’ militalres de YURSS et des Pays Amis de lalsser passer librement a : :

fe Mtulaire du présent passeport ct de ful accorder aide et Protection en | ,
as de besoin, | Lol ae we oS

” Le Sappltant da Ministre .
Affaires Etrangéres de VURSS - :
a Aiur traduction conforme:



--- Page 514 ---
S13

/
‘ .
mee
rn a - Ty . “
, .
. wy . a % '
“Orweren © aprascuER aacuopra, Resourelleneet, .
Cpox. nactoamero Nacnopta apoxacn
,
. : Jusqu' au ” .
.
My a 3
: bw e : ;
- H a
! ste dencreimeraia aa macans wa ce” SY .
= Coon Nactoaucra nacnopra npogacn . hap: ee tet -
Bo JO preteens in V9
Le délai du “présent Passeport est protengé 2 .
: “Jusqu'va dre ee oes | Se it .
: : a ee TD . :
. wen Boones, ..
.
'
i . @ . .



--- Page 515 ---
. a) tama senses

| Bs Onis

Aeticrourentiy, _aimenie
ary,

aetcrereman mas ames £9 cccp

Tepes andoit sorpannunet fyunr

ma Hodnace

“ "Ocke Tat,
HR COCR

visa DIL DPLOMATICA

j

SS. ee Q



--- Page 516 ---
Waid Visas:

BlrLOMATIOVEs to A TICK 7DiPvevatic
Do Visa

. © de transitJnae transit tor tansit
Vite pane ; :
Gg ware Benetexp
y,

ed for :

renewed on a. £
etd on

OHnns Tel Moe.
vo

Thea i

rare
ats yells lore Seetiwrs tran:
8 lle tues

legs
foise

sits



--- Page 517 ---
14-0000 + . '

Sle

| OE PLLACIONLS “EXTERIOR ‘
.
aleZ, i ai de fa fi ba,
Geis dada Inds” Lo lewlity nogeres
: Sunni Yates , oo
i
! oe °
. .
:
2



--- Page 518 ---
: .

Bua, Visa

ae en

.

5

Ne oroag5

B cferh. de how



--- Page 519 ---
WWF eva limee dooize razeo)
ta is esind fo2 eatirwy unite) +

. be ANBASSADEUR.” vy Sioned ee een

NTeebeaiy 23 mapet,
*, voor deze, « : ‘

Wye S

UOL65

Ne tt nek ee

5


--- Page 520 ---
/
. ABLE SECRETARIAT DISSEMINATION“! a Tora Comes 2! AouTina anoson onTUALS BEEN OY
PRAT ORE 7 ¢  gepsogeee -_ ph! nw
SL AAS Filed ey) “BES pf cy ts
apvaNce cosy Creuse Caceres ; [na PADUA Or OF THIS COPY PRONIBITED $F .e
wona,”(}¥es (no ; aa
AsarY TO CO Pue NO.
“mace voc PRE NO.
O mmeno- O nstinn ro BANE
0 ; 2 Y! oe
Bw <B or oxlaes Kah __ .
‘ACTION. Wy a ra, oO . 7 a : : es
" SE CRE T 8923802 OCT 69 CITE MEXICO CITY 1638. . oy a

DIRECTOR Coe. 50er8 862533 ay

> RED EDIEHA\ : ae
LEG AEDIEHARD AEKICK (2 giz #1) 7% w
: | REFS A. MEXICO CITY @810,727 JUNE 1969 .
| a B. HMMA S751$, 14 JULY 1969 ‘
: } : : es
J C. HMMA 37846, 22 SEPTEMBER 1969 cote
ji 1. REFS PROVIDED FULL BIO DATA AND REQUESTED TRACES JIMMY SABORI. de, 4
7 TO DATE NO REPLY RECEIVED. y “
4 2. REQUEST RESULTS RVROCK AND LNHARP AGENCY TRACES ASAP. .
- oo
: 3. FILE: 201- SABORI. a :
SECRET : ; ‘
i :
q i !
| it f
: bods ‘1
7 ; -_ ‘
I .
i i} a
| , an
is so3 st
o Yop o roti u



--- Page 521 ---
Be-00000

Chief, 83 Divisicn
Chief, OH Division

ject of Beferences’ _
reins A, -SEXICO CITY 0810, 27 Juno 1969 ; .
B, EMMA-37513, 14 July 1960 7

-.dctioa Required: 80 below .
. -.4. Reference A requested Headquarters to re-trace Bubject
uagder asea variant and full biogrsephie data which was forvarded
thereia. Reference B forwarded a completed PRQ Part I on Subjest.
Bo would appreciate receiving the results of Headguartera tracea

' 48 well ag Subject’s 201-number (please note that ANDISHARD's

. 20l-aumber was iaadvertently used on Reference B).

3. £8 part of the offort to astablish subject's bona: fides,

. 36 vould appreciate reesiving a licerse plate resolution on the
follosing vehicle, which was driven by Subject te a 7 July 1989
meeting. : ” oo .

. ar: Pantiae Bonneville (year not known)
” Color; Blue with light top
License: BED 785 Texas, Remisfair (1968) plates.
: Plates.
: . \

oooh Soy bu

tor/séhn A, PEORERY -


--- Page 522 ---
14-0000

S2\

. ~, .
? D i § p A Aen rn PROCESSING ACTION
TCH SECRET |. fasnvwesane
Chief, SB Division 7 XX __ [wo woes sours
Bt, nas ONL? QUALIFIED OFsK
_Chief, wa Division « (AB JUDE IDEXING
Re - x

Chiet of Station, Mexico City ef
REDTOP AEKICK- AEDIEHARD

Transmittal of PAQ

ACTION REQUIRED - REFLROMCES

Action Required: For review by MKCRUSH

Transmitted herewith are two Personality Assessnent oS
Questionnaires’ completed by LIBACON--1 and IDENTITY on AKDIEHARD.
The Station would welcone any comments or assessment MKCRUSH
might make on the basis of these. reports. "The Station is not

retaining copies of these PAQs,

fo * : for
aw A/ Ousmane
f x/John A, PROBERT

i

Attachment: |
1. IDENTITY u/s/c
2, PAQ b/w

a 'c/s0 ¥/
C/SB w/att h/w and u/e/c
- C/WH w/att #1 u/s/c; w/o att #2

A at. :007

CROSS RERERERCE TO . DEIPATON SYRGBOK ABD iasiseR .
HUMA-37833 12 September 1969
CaSSF<AnON Wes FRE RSL ~
; vA of DESY A
2

SECRET “i1-285412°



--- Page 523 ---
[bisPaATCH [3S ——

We DDE RIG routed .

|__ Chief, BH Divistea
HES,
q—Shlef, BB Diviston

JOT QUALESED INS
Jean suder neotng

~. ———

*_Acting Chiof of station, Mexico City _ &

ai REDLEG a an nb Re a a

._LIBACON-1 Progresa Report ,

“vias :
References; A, HENW-17278, 26 March 1969
B, © MDU-36817, 28 Harch 1969

C. HEMA-36881, 8 April 1969

. : 1. Forwarded herewith ts’ Bruce H, FERNALD’s progress report
on LIBACGH-1, covering the period 30 January ‘to 15 August 1969,

- 3. AS FRRNALD’s report fadicates, steady pregress has been
made in developing LIBACON-1 into a responsive ageat. LIBACON]-1's
credentials visesevia tha Soviets ara excellent, ard ke is learning
to use these crodentisla to the Station's benefit. He vas .
reluctant.at first, possibly because he did not Want to do the sang. | :

_ thing f6% RVACCH that be refused to do for AEKICE. Patient handling
_ by FERHALD seens to ‘have overcode this reluctance, and LIBACOH-]
gow reepords. wall to direction. : :

3. 80 far, there seens to be no-reason to suspect the sincerity
of LIBACCH@1's relationship with RVPOCK. Ho developed strong
personal affection. and prefessiosal respect for both KARTASUK and
FERNALD, and his turnover to Douglas F, DITHANSON on 14 august 19¢9 .
represents an effort to strengthen the emotional attachment, which
‘seems to be so isportant to him, by providing Ain with a ‘case
officer. vho speaks his native tongue, And, although LIBACHH=l'g
private life is a sess, we Willwtch closely. to see that this dces
aot cause any greater problen than occasional missed meetings and.
@olays in conpictiog acaggnnents. CoE :
_ &-. In the next phase of LIBACON-1's activity, we expect to
concentrate on two things: .. — 2 : an
B. Strengthening the ties with AEDIEHARD (thera ‘have beon
indications that AXDIERARD's “tour may not bo ending shortly
after all, in which case be will remain a prize Station target).

b. Spotting additional agent prospects, as miggésted by.
Reference A. | , . : sy

fox/Bovace E, PRALLETT:
Attachzeat : . ne

Preugresa Report h/y Distribution: . 1!
TORES u/s/e 2 = C/¥a vfatt h/e wads i

oo ier TA? ATES;


--- Page 524 ---
14-0000

523

- they held nine ops meetings.

“ LIBACON-1 had placed on his agreement to work for us W

er more accurately, to.assist us i

an . ey onan’ eur a
T/¥ Attachment to PYA-37762, aptotutnr909 ~

. .

24 August 1969

‘PROGRESS REPORT = re
LIBACON-1 a

“Subject
Period Covered: January 30 to August 14, 1969

“4, LIBACON-1 was recruited by Sawuel J, KARTASUK on January
30 and was handled by him until March 2€, During this period

. -2. Bruce H. FERNALD took over LIPACON-2 on March 26 and
handica hie cto August 14, when he turne? i tver to Douglas F,
DITMANSON. During this period 16 ops meotinugs were held,

3, After a fine recruitment jul KART\SUK also accomplisi 2d tr>
difticult task of cenverting LIBACON-!'s agreement to were for
KARTASUK personally “into a regular working arrangement.

a. Of the nine meetings KARTASUK held with LIBACON-1,
actually only six were working meetings. Info was obtained on
LIBACON=1's personal background as wel] as his ops potential,

’ LIBACON]-1 was SGSWIRLED with agatisfactory results, Further,
LIBACON-1 was motivated to work for us an

and he was mentally prepared
‘During this period the condition which

1 as respected
(i.e., that he would not be asked to report on his personal friends
noch ag -Syentards, his students, or Nexicans. to whon he ‘vis
exotionaliy wttached), LIBACON-2 did complete for KARTASLX.a
15-line: written report on AEDIEHARD. ne

5, FERNALD encountered no problems in getting along with a:.d
handling LIBACON-1, whom he got accustomed to following instruc‘.ons
and to sybmitting reports in writing. ,

to accept another handler.:

G. LIBACON-l's initial attitude was that he had «greed tc work,
n our work against AEKICK, but he
was deternined to keep hinself away frem everybody and everything
associated with AEKICKX. Re did net see AEDIEHARD for ‘anre than

four w2nths, and whea they met accidentally in a resort, LIBACON-1
was decisively. turning down everytting AEDIEHARD asked for, He

went wo far ae to accept a lunctec.s appointment with AFDIEHARD, and
then a day before it was to take place he postponed it indefinitely,

t



--- Page 525 ---
14-0000

Sa

OL ~ SECRET = >
: - 2 =

7. FERNALD succeeded in convincing LIBACON-1. that he should
maintain social or friendly personal contact with AFDIENARD and his
mn - @olléagues and that he could do it without either giving ‘in to his
on ' or their demands, or at the.other extreme, without saying no: to

everything they sention ov ask for. LIBACON~1 followed instructions
. and went’ to AFNIFWVARD's effice to ask him why he had not. called
“him for ten wecxs, rhe result was that LIBACON-l had ‘two luncheon
:, Meetings with ALDIEHARD in July, and. on August 8 LIBACON=1 and his
- wife wore dinner guests of AEDIEHARD and ‘his wife at their apartment,
_. The -AEDIEHWARDS' agreed to come to LIBACON-1's place for a farewell
‘dinner in September and in the meanwhile LIBACON-1 and AEDIEHARD
will meet,for a luncheon on. August 29, .

i. 8.  FFRNALD insisted from tho beginning of his handling of

' LIBACON-1 that the latter prepare bio sketches on the MHHARSHers
H he knew personally and on Spaniards who had lived in the USSR. ’
‘1 *  LIBACON-1 prepared bio skatches, which are actually personality

: assessuents, on AEDIENARD, IDENTITY A, IDENTITY B, IDENTITY C, and
IDENTITY D. The latter two reports showed that he would also report

on two Spaniards who aré close friends of his, ia spite of his

earlier conditions, Further, FERNALD instructed LIBACON-1 to contact

2. “good friend of his(IDENTITY E) when the latte: returned froma

longer trip to Czechoslovakia, LIBACON~l carvied out the assignment :
well and reported (orally) about IDZNTITY S's observatiors impress tons

and conélusions concerning what he sev aud heard curing his ster an :
nis country. IDENTITY KF is also 2 Sood personal friend ot LIBACON - %,

-- 9, From the above it can be seen “that LIBACON=1 has developer
‘inte 4 person who has confidence in us, and. he accepts without
ss reservation that we know what we are doing. : -

. 10, In analyzing.LIBACON-1's written reports it can easily
be seen that LIBACON-1 takes his assignments seriously and when he’
makes a statement*about 2 person he is scrupulous about drawing
enly ‘that conclusion which can be corroborated with facts. DIBACCN=1
a? equally serious and reliable. when he reports about his neeti-ge
wit AEDIELArD: He first: reports the course of the nectiig and
reports AELICIARD's statements..verbatim, as much as pissible, Then,
he uses bt- srea knowledge and the knowledge of the person to relay,
the act.al meaning of the statements, FERNALD not only believes.
that LIBACON-1's reporting. is reliable, but he also feels that ore
can depéerd or, LIBACON-1 to use his knowledge of the area and people
to sepa.'2°e the appearance and verbiage from. the facts, be they

good: er vid.

ue An assessment of the moral and political reliability of
LIBACON-1, from the point.cf. view of his work and activity on our
bohal’.can only be favorable, Th» same cannot be said when ore
views his p.vecial life. In this field he has muny problens, which,
geverw)iv cpoaying, are a result ow the fact that while he is
intellectually mature (or at leas. adequately mature for hia age),

_ SECRST



--- Page 526 ---
re
4

SIs

ae

whon it comes to emotions he acts like a toon-ager, LIBACON-~1

4s aware of this fact and he aséribes it to tho fact that he grew
under conditions of regimentation and moral terror; and when he

found himself in a world in which people live free and there are

ho restrictions on personal activities, as long ar they do not
violate the laws of the country, he remained prusecssed by the desire
to enjoy this freedom, Fortunately, hi:. personal immaturity .
affects his work for us only to the extent that he occasionally

-may not completa an assegsnent;. but when he doos do a job he does:

it very well. on : .

12, To coneluda: - Although LIBACON~1 -has his problens,

‘there are restricted to thé area. which does not affect his reliability,

dependability and loyalty to us and our cause. It is felt that
LIBACON-1. will be still more productive and easier developed when
handled by a case officer speaking Russian;i,e., the language of

his formative years,

, : es Bruce H, FERNALD

i
;



--- Page 527 ---
IDENTITIES ~ too

i
iZ
:
i
i
i
Hl
}
}

“SECRET

U/s/e Attachment to HNMA~37762, 27 August 1969

ee

‘JDENTITY A = _ Vasil CHICHKOV (201-207254)

IDENTITY B- Aleksandr BROVEKIN. (201185114)
WENTITY-¢_-—- Ricardo CASTELLOTS

. IDENTITY D’ = Carmen CASTELLOTE de WOLNY

IDENTITY B=. Karel WENDEL (201-267892) |

.

cee eae me ee


--- Page 528 ---
SECRET

(Thea Pilied try.

DOCUMENT IDENTTFICATION

Ot Fur xc.

Y BrePateN oa”

SUBJECT OF OOCUMENT
a LEME

Wac BOE. ayaa, no. [a Oath

4. aounce Cntr SAF aa 1. evacu,

“~" fros av esemiwates tw Te. bate

[19 TRANS7ERREO TO
at FiLe mo.

BOC ine NT i pIeesitroN
a <7 ce

VAL ENT N SCRGEYEVICH ©

LOGINOV,

1

: / 7
j 20b-245412 | i 050-008-010 }
Sex a Han 7 ; MMMA= 37724 :
' 20 AUG 69 i
\ cit P2 _ |
ne
1

{ voIce SAMPLE ATTACHED ,.

|
|

-
. | . . R 6909030717

FILE IN 201-285 112.

FILE THIS FORM IN FILE NO, ~

SECRET . " Corey

oo > 887 FEC POORIODe EBErtonn.

1



--- Page 529 ---
14-0000

moth

— ere _ pe

Yt we roma”
Te "ALC mks:

. : a-
ong: DIANA pavisy\)
B/X/8E

n

Qiaon O wo wo o arruas To ——____ saan Orneno

Crus oe co run no,

—eneaiticetioay
-SECRET

la

CITE o1RECTOR

. v9 Cuestco erty he} a a
| a i /,

_ REDTOP AEKICK 2763 0
1. ACCORDING TO SENSITIVE HEADQUARTERS SOURCE, MEXIGAN DIPLOMATIC -
VISAS REQUESTED FOR ANATOLIY MAZURIN, WIFE AND SON. MAZURIN SCHEDULED

TO REPLACE LOGINOV,,

2. VISA REQUEST SUBNITTED-v. s. EMBASSY MOSCOW phovipEs

opt ie 32

FURTHER BIO DSTAILS AS FOLLOWS: ANATOLIY’ SERGEYSVICH : ;MAZURIN, DPOB

25 ‘SSPTSADER 1938 AT AP ANNENKA; WIFE, “LID! LIDIYA PETROVNA, DPOB. 17 MARCH 1943

AT XOSCOW: SON, ANDREY ANATOLYSVICH, DPOB 31 DECEMBER 1963 AT MOSCOW,

MICROM.
AUG 19 1969

pos. MICRO. SER.

3. NO HEADQUARTERS TRACES MAZURIN OR FAMILY.
"4. FILE 201-285422 AND 201-, _

- AC/SB/X/WH EL ELE ood
SB/CI/O Muaticn 4.

wp ey

/ 103/04 _
’ Keeples eT GEA ose 7 Matte, 8
‘| WILLIAM V. BROE . AGe ae OT YE [1 98/#0 4 :
; {cre 2 pe tc, AO ae SY/ 2. 2 2
vee t a nea ‘

COORDINATING OFFICTES . ?
- 3 .

“SECRET barareed angoice

REFAOOUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE 15 PROHIBITED. com no,

RELEASING OFFICER



--- Page 530 ---
1409900

77

_— : a i = nen
Lad SEC Ot raaar OissEMNATION -_ “ASSHFIEO MESSAGE Toray con Ke-S TOUTS AND OF nonate: stur’ ov ey

PUNMONUNT Rote SECRET ee

(Weer Fitled fa) reat no

sovnctcory [Jame [nom

Senne wT,

oss av_Dt 63 Ak tel °

ACTION

mou: O] vas G-no

CLAISIFY TO FILE NO.

ALP TO MT NO.

eugmo Cer. ro

-SECR ET 2423402 JUN 69 CITE MEXICO CITY 8763

MEK
DIRECTOR.
DESRISITIED EDT oP AEKICK | mo : :
REF MEXICO CITY 8719 DU 86366] ~ iSinsone063a

_ 10 FERNALD MET SUBJECT REF 23 JUNE,. SUBJECT EXPLAINED: HE
““"" HAD FIRST MET AEDIEHARD IN FEB 69..AT PARTY at OMe OF Local veel
DR. FEDERICAO MARIN (STATION TRACES: “CONFIRM MAREN ‘LEFT WING CONTACTS
BUT NO PREVIOUS RECORD SPECIFIC FUSTEAL CONTACTS). suaseet ACCEPTED
AED IEHARD INVITATION TO DINNER AND RELATIONSHIP FLO SHED ON BASIS
"FRIEND SHIP AND. UNDERSTAMDI NG BETWEEN US AND USSR". IN COURSE OF

MEETINGS (AT LEAST ONCE EN SUBJECT’S APARTMENT ) SUBJECT DROPPED

“NAMES OF “INFLUENTIAL MEXICAN FRIENDS” (AMONG THOSE MENTIONED TO nr
— FERNALD WERE INDUSTRI ALIST CARLOS. TROUYET, PRESIDENTIAL PRIVATE
CF SECRETARY JOAQUIN CYSNERSO, JOURNALIST AGUSTIN BARRIOS GOMEZ," AND
" PAINTER DAVID ALFARO SIQUEIROS) WHICH APPARENTLY LED AEDIEHARD TO
£ EXICAN SCENE.
- ELIEVE SUBJECT MIGHT BE WELL-INFORMED ON GEXCAIN SECEN. AEDTEHARD
: - akBep NUMBER oF QUESTIONS ON POLITICAL MATTERS, SUCH AS: DOES LUIS

boob : ECHEVERRIA HAVE BETTER “CHANCE OF BECOMING MEXICAN PRESIDENT THAN

PE pe ANTONIO CARRILLO FLORES) AND WHAT IS REAL PUaPOSE-OF ROCKEFELLER
7 MISSION (FACT-FINDING COULD NOT BE REAL PURPOSE SINCE EMBASSIES AND

- , _ 7 as cont AG Mee Vy
7 SECRET 9 2OI- ASS HID

|
i
i
i
:


--- Page 531 ---
14-00000

$3°

ROUTING ANO-O8 INIT:ALS- Sf ON OY

Cave $:¢ 20rke-ar Orssrnwanon CUASS:FIED Messace Tora, Comes
FEREN CAT Rota

aavanct Copy oO eure oO morren

2 CLASSIFY TO ee NO

vi, at,
: AEF TO MLE NO.

Ett by. ous mp Dect to

“PAGE 2 MEXIOO CITY 0763 SECRET poe,

Cla IN THESE COUNTRIES must KNow EVERYTHING. THERE IS TO KNOW).
RECENTLY AEDIEHARD ASKED. # suaszcr HAD FRIENDS IN LNPURE. WHEW
SUBJECT SAID HE DID (WITHOUT SPECIFYING panes) AEDIEHARD ASKED HIM
TO GET PHONE DIRECTORY, WHICH HE NEEDS AS LuPure CHANGES DIRECTORY
EVERY SIX MONTHS (TRUE). AT 20 JUNE NEETING, SUBJECT TOLD AED IEHARD
NE HAD NOT YET HAD CHANCE TO TRY OBTAIN DIRECTORY; BUT PROMISED
TRY HAVE ONE FOR 25 JUNE MEETING

, 26 AEDIEHARD HAS CAREFULLY pRoSED SUBJECT BY ASKING IF ME NOT
AFRAID OF HAVING FJSTEALER TO HIS HOME (SUBJECT REPLIED’ THIS WOULD
NOT AFFECT “HIM IN ANY WAYD} BY SUGGESTING THAT SUBJECT “SO WELL
INFORMED HE MUST BE WOFIRM AGENT" (SUBJECT LAUGHED THIS OFF AND

To.S AEDIEHARD HE HATED WOFIRM 5 AND BY. EXPLAINING TO SUBJECT HE NEED

“THE INFO HE ASKED FOR “ON ONE HAND TO ADVACKE IN HIS SCAREER AND ON

_ . OTHER HAND To PREVENT MISUNDERSTANDINGS TO WHICH LACK oF INFO CAN a

EASILY LEAD". WHILE AEDIEHARD GAVE “SUBJECT HIS PHONE NUMBER, HE
TOLD SUBJECT NOT To USE IT. MEETINGS CUSUALLY IN RESTAURANTS) ARE
ARRANGED IW ADVANCE, AND SUBJECT HAS NOTED THAT AEDIEHARD PARKS SIX
"BLOCKS AWAY FROM MEETING PLACE, TAKES BUS To ‘POERT ONE BLOCK PAST
REETING PLACE, THEN SLOWLY WALKS BACK OBSERVING SURROUNDINGS,
MEETINGS SCHEDULED FOR HOURS WHEN RESTAURANTS NORMALLY QUITE EMPTY,

SECRET _ os id



--- Page 532 ---
14-0000

S3\

Conre Secmeramsat Ovssemrvalion mm CUASSIENED NESSACH Tomar COPS... ROUTING AND-DP tITAL sean
PiSONTINT ROTO . ~ GROYRD, f o a ~
SECRET enon ine ae

{Whee Filled In) pammrs 0

REPROOUC TON GF Ts COPY FROM EL

aOvVANCK Cone oO wsuED oO svorreo
wow: O ves O no
2 SABE VO TG NO eee
ee nr’ .
70 _ . _  RREP TO MLE NO.
Ossem ov lee 2 eueeo Oar to arancn OJ Deatacy 0.
pak Ady a nt

ACTION

PAGE 3 MEXICO CITY 08763 SECRET : ; rn
AND AEDIEMARD- LOOKS’ OVER. CLIENTEL” CAREFULLY¥: a : ae
: 3. STATION DOES Not INTEND RUN SUBJECT AS DOUBLE. AMONG OTHER
Po a REASONS, WE WOULD BE FORCED CONE UP IMMEDIATELY WITH PHONE DIRECTORY
AND NAME OF PERSON WHO SUPPLIED IT. SUBJECT ACTUALLY DOES NOT KNOW
ANYONE IN LNPURE, AND HE HAS BEEN INSTRUCTED ADMIT TO AEDIEHARD

THAT HE HAS NO CURRENT CONTACTS IN LNPURE AND THUS HAS NO READY

_ SOURCE FOR DIRECTORY. HE 1S TO ADD THAT HE DOES NOT BELIEVE It ;

WOULD BE HARD TO DEVELOP SUCH CONTACTS. STATION HOPES THIS CANDOR ;

WILL DISCOURAGE OR DELAY AEDTEHARD'S USE OF SUBJECT AS AGENT AGAINST . '
LNPURE WITHOUT DESTROYING RELATIONSHIP, LEAVING STATION FREER TO :

. SHAPE RELATIONSHIP TO WOFIRM ADVANTAGE (ASSUMING STATION ASSESSEMENT

OF SUBJECT IS FAVORABLE). FERNALD INITIAL IMPRESSION IS THAT SUBJECT
1S SOLDIER OF FORTUNE TYPE. HE OBVIOUSLY CONTACTE LupuRe.BECASME .
“HE AFRAID HE GETTING IN TOO DEEP; MAY ALSO BELIEVE THERE MONEY TO BE
“"\. MADE IN GAME HE THUS FAR ENJOYING, ~ NEXT FEW MEETINGS WITH FERNALD

H
t
t

i: WILL BE DEVOTED TO OBTAINING BIO AND BACKGROUND DATA AS WELL AS

COMPLETE DETAILS HIS DEALINGS WITH AEDLEHARD.
“Ae AEDIEHARD PCS DEPARTURE NOW SCHEDULED FOR SEPTEMBER

(PER LIREALM-1) OR OCTOBER/NOVEMSER (PER LIBACON-{ FROM 201-825 743).
5, FILE 201-285412. ,

“SECRET

SECRET



--- Page 533 ---
s Saat t Stcecraur _ DrssenisaTron SSO Messace

We TNO moPOer cin
. Pe SECRET...
‘ Se (When Billod ini ON
_—_—___S Oe  oriticerri cc

. a
"ang ayace: NTE IN ,
Advance coor Bajo im heme
{400 wou O vas O no

ww Be . WEE) Bf. Settee vo ene wo k RY TS
. - . SACP TO MLB NO. = - ~ zh "
Csse~ ov. A me . ar: . anancn “grazter 3.

SCTION

Ko
SCRET 2t@0ac QuN 9 CITE MEXICO CITY o713

PRIORITY DIRECTOR F Poe 21 dW68 NB BIER 2a a
DESENSHAZED REDTCP AEKICK yee ra wwe ox :

i. REQUEST PRIORITY TRACES s Jane sfSauorr, BORN ABOUT) i925
CCUSACITIZEN OF ITALIAN EXTRACTION, RESIDENT OF TESAS ALD CALIFORNIA , .

CURRENTLY IN MEXICO T_VISA_SE $ ~
SABORT WALKED IN TO COS 20 JUNE ON RECOMMENDATION BOB

26
JOHNSON, FORMER LNERGO AGENT GUADALAJARA, NOW RETIRED IN TEXAS.
JORNSON HAD RECOMMENDED COS AS LNPURE FIRST SECRETARY WITH WHOM KE
ACQUATRTED . :

_ 34 [SABORT CLATMED HE MMS HAD 12 MEETINGS WITH AEDIEKARD ,
WITR.NEXT MEETINGS SCHEDULED FOR EVEINGS 20 AND 25 JUNE. SABORI
WOULD NOT SAY MUCK ABOUT NATURE OF RELATIONSHIP’; EXCEPT THAT ASDIE~
; ; nT) waD ASKED HIM PROCURE LATEST LNPURE TELEPHONE DIRECTORY, WHICH
WAS REASON FOR HIS CONTACT WITH COS. WHEN ASKED WHY 1E WOULD WANT To
FULFILL, SUCH A REQUEST, SABORI ANSWERED THAT THERE REALLY WAS Not
Se MUCH, THAT AEDIEHARD COULD GET OUT OF WIM, AN INSURANCE SALESMAN,
BUT 1 wauLo LIKE TO BE ABLE DO LITTLE FAVORS IN RETURN FOR FAVORS
AEDIEMARD COULD DO FOR HIM. AS EXANFLE, AEOICNARD MAD INVITED 4ItM
TRAVEL FUSTEAL. GOS SAID KE KAD- NO AUTHORITY TURN OVER PRONE BOOK, ;

MICRO om DV Yow _Y
SECRET. aot IS us

eres

JUL 24 Isi3

DOT acre wen.



--- Page 534 ---
it 0000

i oe

_Totay Sart Out NS ANO-O8 INTLS RON BY

Cage Steamer tawiat Orgst wna tion ___ Cuasairito Massage”
BRST IST = ry
, SECRET moscee~
{Whan Bsied ia} behqveeniny

REPHOOUC TON OF Tats CORT PRON HTS

AOvANCE COP? oO w9VED Q SLOTTED

woe. C) ves G na

. 2 CURR SIE FO PILE OO me
vi ar.

. REP TO PLE RO.
rue mo Caer, to aeece pestaoy (80

Ut Mlk 2 © Nal 5 A an tn

NFO:

RID COPY:
PG ek

Onan pv en
ACTON

! PAGE 2 MEXICO CITY OTIS SECRET
SABORI SUGGESTED COS CONTACT “PROPER PEOPLE” AND HE WOULD’ CALL: cos . 7
FOR ANSWER. ALSO SAID HE HAD NO OBJECTION TO “PROPER PEOPLE" |
: 4. SABORI CALLED COS AT 18@8 HOURS 20 JUNE AND AGREED TO
‘AVAIT CALL AT 9908, 23 JUNE. WAS TOLD FERSON CONTACTING KIM wet

CONTACTING HIM AT LOCAL ADDRESS. : . |
1

HAVE ALL FURTHER ADVICE, TO WHICH HE ALSO AGREEASLE.
5. PLAN HAVE BRUCE H. FERNALD CONTACT SaBORt 23 JUNE TO
ATTEMPT TO GET DETAILS OF CONTACTS WITH AEDIZHARD WITHOUT FRIGKTENTRG
SABORT. OFF AND WITHOUT INTERFERING WITH CHANCES AEDIEHARD WILL TURN \
QVER SABORI TO SUCCESSOR. UNLESS THERE ARE DRAMATCI DEVELOPNENTS,
STATION SEES THIS AS CHANCE TG CET AGENT IN 02 GROUND FLOCR WITH
SUGCE SSoR RATHER THAN OPPORTUNITY TAKE LAST-DITCH ACTION AGAINST
: _ AEDIEHARD. WILL NOT PROVIDE PHONE BOOK BUT WILL TAKE PASSIVE
; "|. ATTITUDE, EVEN IN FACE SABORI REFUSAL PROVIDE FURTHER DETAIL,
UNTIL KE TURNED OVER TO AEDIEHARD SUCCESSOR.
6. INEX SABORI. FILE: 201-2854 12.

: , SECRET

8% :

5 SECRET



--- Page 535 ---
14-0000

~O3N.

aSSOTO Mestact Tora Comes Uti) AMO/0R Inpria.$ - SEEN OT
ec emer oF
ZPESECRET Sew?
[When Fdied el Siinece
REPROOLT TION OF Tres COPE PAQe BITED

Capt Sec erat OssewiuaTron
. PEM OT SOMES

gt nee
ADWANCE COPY oO weueo O DOTTED

rar: #* |

moun OO vas O wo

Casey 19 PLE MO.

BME TS Foo NO.

oastaov (8:0.

sranen()

rus mo Caer to

CEP. mis Cf Fr=- 2- _ - '

SECRET 1423342 MAY 69 CITE MEXICO CITY 0258

O:s9Eu oy.
ACTION

| DIRECTOR.
~ BESENSERPEO REDTOP AEKICK AEDIEHARD
REF DIRECTOR 91478

15691958536”

Gok, ASSUMPTION PARA 2 REF CORRECT.
cs 2. FILE: 201-238943; 201-7519093 201-285412.

SECRET

SECRET . Deno exe



--- Page 536 ---
14-0000

539

se, . a
: TOTAL COPS: 1%

oma RV TERREY

vers, SH/X/ KH | SECRE |
mr 6413 E325 :
bare, 12 MAY 1969

CAGLA BECALTAMIAT OtssamiMAtiON Ovex Ci no moan ©) asrvan ro... saancn Orusrao

Pr oan

CT) rus os cs ene no.

; ae oe * jase and tine Tia) peters womber] a
ORT uaa PQ D7 gy mrss "give omect
to -OMLXICG CITY ? O02 trey < ha 78 7

DESEUSITYZEDLvTOP AUKICK ALDILIARD
REFERENCE Az MEXICO CITY 0159 (IN 54970) % #
B: MEXICO CITY 0152 (IN $4251) *
1. W8GBBY AGREE WITH GUIDANCE GIVLN LIBACON-1 PER PARAGRADIL 2,

AND WITH STATION OBJECTIVES FOR USE LIGVAL-1 PER PARAGRAPH 3, OF

» REFERLSCE Be
2. “ASSUME LIOVAL-1 HAS BEEN “BRTERED NOT TO APPLAR ALXIOUS,
“SHOULD HE BE CONTACTED BY AEDIEHARD, AND THAT THe LATTER SuUULD BL

ThE ONE TO GENERATE TRE MOMENTUM |FOR SUBSLQUENT CONTACTS.

3. FILE: 202-238943; 201- 751909; -201+285412,, -

Lobe - END OF MESSAGE: cs a
CSB/X/WH LORS ay sv/c1/o Quit. penn afrlt

*originators Comments: AEDIENARD flatly demanded that LIbACUN-1 intro;
duce him to LIOVAL-I, a request which LIBACUA-1 was. reluctant to
honor, AEDIEMARD said that such ain introduction was important to his

career.
@*aUTLHARD did not ‘actually state. ‘that an introduction was important
te, his career but left that: impression with the reporting source.
Bteslot Vk bigy 7 i CF WiledIon
Sh KAN VV. BROL ot _ SB XO °
fii - :
: So! Dor RSI" ;
. CeoepiMa ras a riCsEs .
AERA OF HTED . ~~. . ° a, A AUTNTNTES Ae
; Sib rR it | emery od oeneea

AfpeooUCTION SY GONER Tan THE SSSUING OFFICE 1S PAOHHOITED, Caer we.



--- Page 537 ---
14-0000

 Obe.

FE S(COrtaRiay Orsseminat . <i) Mt :
FRO Tae EEO ME ___Torat Corts 22 ENO ANO/CR INTIALY - SEE. BY.
—C-7SECRET oie =
15 20 tare Seton
[When Fuiled In) Serum te eho me eee

Sowavis >} sd
. i REPRODUCTION OF THOS COPY. PROM BITZD
ct Pee. y
avancticey [Tliawueo [J norro Ct es
mom O

“On ee)
ev. a: 2 CLASBIFY TO FILE On
K-AEP YO PRE NO.
oot ev Bo ote 2 exe mo Qatr to enancn() orstroy CO sia.
ANOS
—, DJaiocory|™*
n HEV AK AED bd B a 4 "OP OLE Ie
cD
‘

: oe ; ASKS.
SECRET 0919322 MAY 69 CITE MEXICO CITY 0159

. PIRECTOR f
bee oo DESENSHARED: et op AEKICK AEDIEHARD 7 hv 54970 0/2

REF MEXICO CITY 9152 ¢ 1/ S¥237) |
eee 7 : oly 8 MAY LUNCH MEETING DID NOT. TAKE PLACE, LIBACON-1 PHONED
: AEDIEHARD TO POSTPONE FOR 45 MINUTES BECAUSE OF CONFLICT WITH .
CLASS. AEDIEHARD REPLIED IN THAT CASE HE WOULD CALL LIBACON-1 TO :
ARRANGE LUNG FOR FOLLOWING WEEK.
2. CLARIFICATICH PARA 4 REF: AEDIEHARD DID NOT ACTUALLY SAY : j
+. THAT MEETING LIOVAL-1 WAS-IMPORTANT TO HIS CAREER. THIS WAS LIBACON-1°S
‘* INTERPRETATION BASED ON EVIDENT IMPORTANCE TG KEDIEHARD OF MEETING ,
LIOVAL “Ly LIBACOY1°S, CLEAR, IMPRESSION THAT AEDIEKARD HAVING

TROUBLES AT YORK (AEDIEHARD SPEAKS CONTEMPTUOUSLY OF HIS COLLEAGUES),

“AND AEDIEHARD'S STATEMENT EARLIER IN CONVERSATION THAT HE NOT LOOKING

FORWARD TO SPENDING NEXT 7K0 YEARS AT HONE.
3, FILE: 291~285412, #0 1-283943, 201751009,

SECRET.

MICROFILMED

GB Pet -A3 FESR SCOR
Bid!“ PS1 G04 on .
Re o%\
SECRET er,

oe ral psv 7g v



--- Page 538 ---
Feet tee erenar Ossi Ossturanone Qvasseud yoemd ura tunes =, stinay ee wn ere ot tosnn as
3 VT NOTICED 7 en =
> fy SECRET enne ie aroun os

pomiamaliry .

rwiws Fila is) HO seewenae
PEPRAIT ON OF THs COPY PRONIDITED

anscreors [Jarre [Jno

~ ar

srascn orsreov (J 00

peace w Rie pan

- on : , . aS
SECRET 9980402 MAY 69 TLE MEXICO CITY 9152

DIRECTOR - oa SF
_ DESENSHWEBeptop agxICK AEDIEWARD SRN 291 -

1. 1N CHANCE AS-MINUTE MEETING AT OUT OF TOWN SWIMMING RESORT

SMAY, AEDIEHARD SUDDENLY AND BESPERATELY BRACED LIBACON-1 To
INTRODUCE HIM TO LIOVAL=1, AEDIEZHARD PREVIOUSLY AWARE LIOVAL~1

- LIBACON-1 CONTACT AND HAD AT TIMES FISHED FOR INTRODUCTION BY
OCCASIIONALLY ASKING LIBACON-i FO PUT HIM ON CONTACT WITH PERSONS WHO
COULD TRAVEL TO WOLADY, BUT HAD SEVER BEFORE MENTIONED LIOVAL-1

. BY NAME. WHEN LIBACON~1 RESISTED BY STATING LIOVAL~1 NOT ONLY HIS
.. STUDENT BUT ALSO GOOD. FRIEND WitK WHOM AEDIEHARD COULD ACHIEVE

NOTHING BECAUSE oF LIOVAL~1" 5s FERSGNAL INTEGRITY AND POLITICAL
CONVICTIONS, AEDIEHARD BECAME ABUSIVE AND FLATLY DEMANDED THAT
* LIBACON=1 MAKE, INTRODUCTION. LISACON- 1 CONTINUED TO REFUSE até Is.
TRULY OPPOSED TO MAKING INTRODLCTION AS HE DOES NOT WANT TO GET
“ yvoLveD WITH AEKICK AND DOES NOT WANT TO DO ANYTHING WHICH vouLD

fe

MAKE LIOVAL- 1 SUSPECT HE Is ISVCLVED WITH AEKICK) AND AEDIEHARD

EVENTUALLY INSISTED THEY EET FOR LUNCH FOLLOWING WEEX TO pIscuss

MATTER FURTHER. a WYO er

2. LIBACCON-1 SELECTED 8 MAY FOR LUNCH (SO THAT HE COULD

GBD81- DBS Fy 3
Boger= 751 907

Der dss 472



--- Page 539 ---
14-0000

GUY

LABLE SECALTARUT DISSEMINATION LLASSIFED Maseace Ural Com

VinOnoeT ROTH
7 Nae ROTTED SECRET acer ane
{When Filled in) Bors

REPROOUC TION GF THIS COPY PROWEITES

wom: O ves 0 no

ADVANCE COPY oO auso. Oo mors

. 2 CAASEIFY TO PLE WO.
ay, ay: aan

REP TO PLE NO.

puc mo Qacr. ro

ose avn
ACTION

seawenC} orsraov 8:0.

PAGE 2 MEXICO CITY 9152 $ E CRET

ve -_ "REPORT ABOVE TO CASE OFFICER AT SCHEDULED 7 MAY MEETING). CASE

OFFICER INSTRUCTED LIBACON-1 TO CONTINUE BE RELUCTANT IN ORDER TO
FORCE AEDIEHARD TO LAY HIS CARDS ON TABLE AND TO DO ALL PLANNING FOR
INTRODUCTION, ON OTHER HAND, LIBACON-1 NOT TO BE SO RELUCTANT AS
TO PUT HIMSELF ON AEXICK BLACKLIST AND HE SHOULD EVENTUALLY AGREE
MAKE INTRODUCTION IF AEDIEHARD CONTINUES INSIST.

3. STATION OBVIOUSLY INTERESTED IN HAVING LIOVAL~-1 MEET AEDIEHARD

i NOT ONLY FOR CONTINUED CLOSE ASSESSMENT AEDIEHARD BUT ALSO TO NOTE

ANY AEKICK REACT LON TO LIOVAL-1°S INVOLVEMENT IN AEKITE CASE,
LIOVAL-1 HAS BEEN BRIEFED ON HOW TO REACT IF APPROACHED BY AEDIEMARD.
STATION ALSO WISHES BE IN POSTION TO INTRODUCE PERSONS OF ITs

CHOICE TO AEDIEHARD AND/OR HIS SUCCESSOR VIA LIBACON-1 |IN FUTURE.

HE SHOULD THEREFORE NOT BURN HIS: rips BY ADAMANT REFUSAL INTRODUCE
‘LIOVAL~1. |

As acon SUPRISED BY AED IEHARD *S COMPLETE “Loss oF COOLY

#N INSISTING ON INTRODUCTION. AEDIEHARD EVEN INDICATED THAT MEETING
LIOVAL-1 WAS IMPORTANT FOR HIS, CAREER AND THAT IF HE, was NOT SUCCESS-
‘FUL HE MIGHT HAVE TROUBLE GETTING. ANOTHER TOUR ABROAD. He NOT LOOKING
FORWARD TO RETURNING HOME. (STATION COMMENT: ABOVE au RECENT
LIREALM INCIDENT INDICATE AEDIEHARD FEELS SELF UNDER | NCREASING

. | SECRET



--- Page 540 ---
14-0000

: FR Scien Repco ey mazes
oe . © SECRET ease,

; AOVANCE Cony Oo sasuco-. Carer

tyme es

a
{When Fited lo) mee

2, wom: O ves O wo

= CLABBIFY TO MLE WO

REP TO MLE NO,

“_oxstaov (Jaa.

eranewO

org ao Creer. ro

PAGE 3 MEXICO CITY e152 SECRET
PRESSURE TO PRODUCE PRIOR TO DEPARTURE, )
5 FILE: 281-285412, 201°258945, 201- 751989 °
SE ¢ RET

_..-- SECRET


--- Page 541 ---
14-0000

Sie

'
t
i
i

“gaestace tora comes {8 Pe HOON INTHALS - $1.88 OF

SECRET woofers

(When Filled tn) Weneeer mn

cur

LAOLe StcREtamat DssEwNAnON
MASONTUNIE MOTHAD

INDRA: “o yee 0 No

CLASOIFY TO FILE NO.

VY ne ay:

REF TO FILE NO.

rug mo Caer. eaanenO) ossrroy (96.

SEC RE T 0323432 APR 69 CITE MEXICO CITY,9722
. MEX

DIRECTOR cos
 pesergsHTEO tor LIREALM AEDIEHARD AEKICK ~tasciemumme? ————— tins _Vhrn6sN28.944
REF. eiEXICO CITY 9456 (7% 12647) . : AG
OW 22 HARCH LIREALM-1 Sav AEOIEMARD AT CLUS, THERE was

le
i .
THEY DISCUSSED

NO OPPGRIUNITY FOR “AN EXTENDED PRIVATE CONVERSATION.

A ‘MOVIE CatieRA WHICH AEDIEHARD WANTS TO SELL AND LIREALM SAID
AEDIEHARD THAT HE HAD SOMETHING

OGETHER SOON TO DO SO.

HE MIGHT FIND puYER. THEN TOLD
HE WANTED TO TALK ABOUT AND HOPED TO GET T

AEDIEKARD SAID HE WOULD CALL LIRZALM DURING WEEK AND TAKE HIM TO

LUNCK.
ON 24 MARCH AEDIEHARD CALLED LIREALM aT LATTER *S OFFICE ,

q BACKGR OUND) TO MAKE LUNCHECN
AEDIEHARD To A
AEDIEHARD DID

Be.
FROM PHONE BOOTH (STREET NOISE I
” DATE. LIREALM-1 SUGGESTED 26 inaRCH AND INVITED
KEY CLUB WHICH LIREALM USES FOR BUSINESS LUNCHES.

NOT RECOGNIZE THE CLUB BUT AGREED.
MORNING OF 26 MARCH AEDIZKARD CALLED LIREALM aT OFFICE TO

Se.
AS EXCUSE ( A THIN ONE SINCE IT

CANCEL LUNCH GIVING SON'S bOG BITE
HAPPENED A WEEK PREVIGUSLY).” HEXG UMM ENT: STATION S
CASED KEY CLUB AND FOUND NOT TG HIS LIKING SINCE IT 1S PRIVATE.)

NG

es Cort a y
SECRET «5s 20) -z0S412

USPECTS AEDIENARD



--- Page 542 ---
14-0000

a)

Csact SCE Tear Ocssevenanone Crassiewo Messice Tora Comes ROUTING ANO-OR INITIALS» SEEN OY
ee SEENON

_ OST SS SECRET maumiieswere LS]

(Whee Filfod ty) honed

ey
creer

tose, OF vee O wo

ADNANTE COPY 7 ssc00 DO nortes

EC SI 4s PGS

CUASBIFY TO PLE WO

ARO TOE Ol.

ruc mo Cer, ro pease OJ orsteov Os.

ow.

i PAGE 2-mzazCo CITY s722 SECRET ; - a,
4. ON 30 MARCH LIREALM AGAIN SAW AEDIEHARD AT CLUB. ‘LET oY
, ‘AED IENARD Know HE DISPLEASED AT LUNCHEON CANCELLATION AND CONSIDERED !

EXCUSE A DODGE, CAgDIEHARD'S SON WAS THERE WITH SMALL BANVAID ON ;

ARM. y FROM HIS EXPRESSION, AEDIEHARD WAS EMBARRASSED AND ;

i OFF - Hance. ; a Fr

7 5. AFTER TENNIS LIREALM GOT AEDIEHARD ASIDE TO TELL Him PURPOSE: ; 5
OF LUNCH waS TO. TELL HIN THAT HIS JOKING AND NEECLING OF LIREALA :

| HAD ENSARRASSED HIN IN FRONT OF MEXICANS, PARTICULARLY RECENT OFFER
OF MONEY, AEDIEWARD INTERRUPTED TG SAY IT WAS ONLY A JOKE. LIREALM . ‘
SAID KE CONSIDERED IT MALICIOUS AND HE WOULD NOT TOLERATE sucH , ; :
BEHAVIOR IN FRONT OF FRIENDS IN FUTURE. AEDIEHARD APOLOGIZED
PROFUSELY, Bato HAD NG SAD INTENTIONS AND PROMISED NOT REPEAT 11,

Buk

IN FUTURE, = s
6. LIREALA REPCRIED AEDIEHARD was COMPLETELY UNPREPARED FOR

ABOVE EXHANGE AND WAS TRANSPARENTLY UISTURBED, LISTRESSED, AND _
DISAZVANT AGED, . : : : |
7. LISEALY WILL CONTINUE TO BE FRIENDLY To ARITEHARD: HETROOMP , Eo
GOING QUT OF HIS WAY. ;
8. WILL REPORT any FURTHER DEVELOPMENTS.
9. FILE: 201-265412 AND 261-77337,

".. SECRET

SECRET



--- Page 543 ---
(13). On 12 December 1968 two team menbers spotted Valentin |

fo. CO . !
S. LOGINOV (known KGB) walking with an unknown Mexican male. :

After LOGINOV departed the Mexican remained at a restaurant

|
H . ‘for an hour appearing to be waiting for someone, The Mexican : ‘.
finally departed after making a phone call and was ‘lost in | ;
heavy traffic, The team members obtained the Mexican's license ' |
plate number. from which he was identified as Ignacio VALLINA ~ ; .
Barres, So, : at _ _ , i .
; 7 : co, . ci
| |
t
! j
: s !
|
i _ i
i : i
ve c . ,
1 Prom nstes gee Cos Conperenca. | a4-2¢ Maren (464 :

ble Dee ose



--- Page 544 ---
14-00000 ,

Gay

20 LRM G9PL

IMPS TGd, 28 December loot
By EEEW#16709, IL Ccteber Ne

Perv LUENVCY Subject of References (Subject) contacted

Subjéet said’ that che was’ 0°) i
to the VEA and had just
Teach but

hone of ler oo

ve full inferantion on ber cll to AEDILEAND on +
that she was just abo to call the case a
7 when he oadied
to v

ing

beens
2 Would
isited }

toac .
cee A when
care of

he had never
had not receiv

TA EA

VE 2012265312 eisige +

— aay
. rere
: > eye UNE



--- Page 545 ---
14-0000

ot

cos C C . :

errr rit) 1 EPAT GI RUE OL Afri UMELTE

pppna ene ;

Bubloctts reporting was terribly confused.
a £ fafd that

Sven 4 Pebruavy. About |
f

8.08

> el} over at the
The mato prests hed
ada hin ugunal
S be ati loved
Ov when be left ‘pleading u .

we, MThey

stayed
tment,

D debriefed her on her activities cince they lest
that ha woutd ke cening te New York on vacatién.
visit her snd eave hin bes address and telephone
ate cover) .. Ske asked shout the manuscript of
iesho had left-with bin, ie told hev that it vas in
nnd that he was leokion for a publisher. Sha teld him:
the morning Sobruary and he promised
before sho: lett detualls, ANDIZIARD spent consider
ring the other ladies than ho spent tal

ruary, Subject called ALDIVEARD tn 77.
not sin, She was told to call
did but be was still not ina.

ara tn gn the evening of 8

" re contacting
ad on the morning of (9

next

P in sipnifiennt conversation
o- see her a secend time, it would seen
This is not surprising since
the sume assessaent of hex that the
: | even worse impression than at the
fotieea tetatly self-centered person who could not even.
last nemes ct the women who met AEDIEHAND although
endlessiy. about them on how they. relate to her. Ter
ated.

- Lorillard Gf CURTIS

i Me tah con namin perme rman, cones Seed



--- Page 546 ---
14-0000

we

a
3
i
k
i
i
'
i
z.

|

~&-

"SEPARATE COVER ATTACMUNT “
TO MMMA-3 729, 17 MARCH D9
Elizabeth Duncan ee :
P.O, Box 425::.- i . -_ ; ;
’ Spring Lake, New Jersey Se ov “
2 of . t
Telephone No:- 201-449-3309 |
4
. .
‘ ot
ood
‘ :
~ i q
. : '
X ’ t
: 4
»
voce . _ a. woe Te
'
i
i
EB
SECRET


--- Page 547 ---
Cascd Secarramar Orssemeuhon -CUSSInED Messace __Fote. comes =~ BOUING ANOLON IwTacs - SHEN BY
_ PERTORT ERRORS = a
- ss cy
sovancrdory [L]ussuro [] sorts Gee 5 2 eS J
. mors i ves Ose cs a —
, Custiee re rie WO vs
ee at --——* : : :

_ PREF TO ALE NO.

“" pissen av Ly: sh + 2G rus mo Dect - ;

+. ARTION rer a
7 . RID COPY - . ~
SC. Ping. ve oo
. ~ - ies ¢ ~ 2. a

tl
SECRET 1228152"
‘DinecTOR ee
ESERSREEDNED 0° LIREALM AEDIEHARD ACKICK aaiapamtst satiate tes W269 12827
(REF A, DIRECTOR 81831 _ "| _ ry
B. Mexico city 9481 Cpqy 0973) ae

1. LIREALM BRIEFED ON REF A PLAN O8 1 ‘bane, MEIS IN a
COMPLETE AGREEMENT AND: FINDS If INHAR aay Witt as COVER status sy
“AND TEMPERAMENT. WHETHER AEDIEHARD ASREES To QUID PRO QUO OR Rot,

BOTH LIREALM AND STATION BELIEVE THAT TaLK WITH AEDIEHARD WILL i
“STRENGTHEN LIREALM"S COVER, LIREALM 1S ENTHUSIASTIC ABOUT CONTINUED ! +
CONTACT WITH AEDIEHARD ON BASIS QUID £RO GUO, oo al
2. IN EVENT AEDIEMARD DOES NOT AGREE TO QUID PRO QUO AT FIRST
ENCOUNTER BUT CONTINUES TO PROVOKE OR HARASS LIREALM, Botn LIREALA.
AND STATION CONSIDER IT ESSENTIAt. FOR LIREALM TO WALK IN ‘INMEDIATELY
ASDED IN MEXICO CITY 9375

IN ORDER TO IMPLEMENT ORIGINAL PLAN Fa

AND 93814 THIS FEATURE WILL BE AUTOMATIC ON FIRST WORKING DAY AFTER , i

EucOuNTER, LIREALM HAVING CHECKED WITH THE STATION" IN. ADVANCE. o
3° ON ACCORDANCE WITH ORDERS TO STaY AYAY FROM AEDIEHARD, L2]

“LIREALM HAS SCHEDULED LEGITINATE BUSINESS TRIP ON 15 MARCH WEEK- Fa

END, HE JS COMMITTED TO PLAY AEDIEHARD IN A TENNIS TOURNAMENT

£S Cary 12 hang
ye _ SECRET



--- Page 548 ---
. -  teq Ca0ct Secactamar Orsewenarion Ccasswico Messace | Tota, Comes ROUTING anon manars - Sten OY
S iC] Fistowomr none

2 MEXICO. CITY 9456 § E ¢ R E t

OPPORTUNITY To” TALK TO AEDIEWARD OCCURS EARLIER, LIREALN WILL USE
“THIS OPPORTUNITY, 9

4. SHOULD LPAURORA SLUG #€ USED TxI5 ‘TRAFFIC? .

5. FILE: 201-2854125. 201- TISSR2, eo
SECRET oe

rm i

AND WILL SCHEDULE It FOR 22 oR 23 MARCH, - HOWEVER, - iF NATUR: Bene °



--- Page 549 ---
“4
. Came ssc Oessrenanon !. —~ asswrap wessace Torm Sony WJ] = UTES wNEvOS waMiLs - SIE OF
aS (Et a
: = :

he eee ’

: nm farerce

Rae ay

. DiRector Cow ORS
* DESBHGEMZEBeDToP LIREALM AEDIEHARD ABKICK et f7

REF DIRECTOR 81831 .
STATI fucty Co.

AS is pose COW TAWED RE . te
ae SESISEIOSED LIREALM-1

leo
WILL. BE BRIEFED ON 11 MARCH. .
‘2 rt) CONSIDERING TARGETTI8G aroietina, HE “Has TOLD ‘LIREALM-1 .

“AND. OTHERS IN GROUP THAT HE RETURNING HONE IN JUNE. DOES NOT XNOW
IF IT 1S PCS OR HONE LEAVE. NCWEVER, HIS VIFE TOLD.LIREALM THAT IT
WILL BE ‘PCS AND THAT SHE CANNST WAIT. SINCE AEDIEHaRD anniek PCS
IN aucus 1965, HE IS ABOUT READY FOR PCS TRANSFER. 4

3. FIE: 201-285412 AND 281-773337. os a

Z
#
2
i
4
i

bo SECRET aver -

220] -ASSVIA



--- Page 550 ---
|
a

|

|

nt

‘

 B fi ie Be | csassey to one -—____.

2 a wt
Capt Stcweramat Drtseimarion . Cus “AED D Massie, ke Tota Comes 4! mous. A AND/OR soe sees ay
CSF ROT ee

‘taQgues . y
|. SECRET ected
7 (yfer tiled! Boece ——
- - Peabo HON.OF TeI$ COPY PROD: HITED
BOW ANCE COA QO 8LED [favor

te g6- weet vee One 2

Ge! Mnbe 19 ene we, aw:
ef ar ) rue mo Oaer, 16, a seanenw Oi. orsreovOee

patel v9 et

a

SECRET 970052 MAR 69 CITE MEXICO cHT¥-93

_ : theo w08490
DIRECTOR = ment 3 7

DESERSMPEPEOT OP LIREALM AEKICK semeussep
| RFS! A, MEXICO CITY 93732 74 |
B. DIRECTOR 81435 Ce i i
de  LIREALN WILL AVOID cowtact WITH 201-2854 12. HOVEVER |
-LIREALM PARTICIPATING IN TEWNIS TOURNAMENT WHERE MIGHT SEE aM
BUT CAN EASILY AVOID CoNvERSATON,
2. RE PARA 3 REF Bt STATION IS INTERESTED IN suis ton
OF POSSIBLE EXPLOITATION OF THIS INCDENT AND BELIEVES
_ SOMETHING COULD BE DONE WITHOUT REVEALING LIREAL'S TRUE
<WOFIRM STATUS, MOST INTERESTED IN HAVIKG HEADQUARTERS IDEAS.
“3. FILE: 201- 1933375 201-285412,

‘Secner “

« QfTICER STAMP
CORDS OFF
BE tion

SECRET



--- Page 551 ---
i
!

- e ~ . . . - so .
S38: Sicorravrr Orsse ination Cia CO MESSAGE Toru Comes an FANDOM ITIL.» SEEN BY
Whos a omma a CECDET md ~
_ ; SECRET ~2-4y

{Wea Fuled nt STITT

V
£

eo
Advance Cony DD smee: om
: Re eo.

BEPRCOUCTION GF THiS COM FONE TED

wo Co ous 0 vo ~~
cuassey TO me NO Pinuow, . tak Wook

onancu C] oxsrroy Que

DESHISIEZEGD top LIREALM AEKICK ARRON
REF? MEXICO CITY 9356 Co7St1)
bh FOLLOWING FROM LIREALH-1 SECOND, WRITTEN REPORT AND

DEBRIEFING ON 6 MARCH. oS : _
Ae LEREALM=1 AND 20i-285412 (SUBJECT) ARE MEMBERS OF AN
ENFORMAL GROUP WITHIN THEIR CLUB WHICH REPAIRS TO ONE OF
GROUPS HOME EVERY SECOND SUNDAY FOR LUNCH AFTER TENNIS. 2
MARCH INCIDENT OCCURRED AT SUCH A’ LUNCH WITH CA 25. PEOPLE PRE-
SENT. . 7
“B. DISCUSSION WAS NOT OUT OF EARSHOT OF OTHER GUESTS BUT
“aT TABLE DURING LUNCH. SUBJECT MADE. $x ATTEMPT TO KEEP It
PRIVATE. IN FACT, AFTER STATING HE HAD SEEN LIREALM SEVERAL -
TIMES AT SANBORNS WITH IGTELLIGENCE | OFFICERS, SUBJECT TURNED mo
A GERMAN GUEST AND ARMED , “DO YOU THINK THAT LIREALN COULD haak |
EARN AS MUCH MONEY AS HE DOES, DOING WHAT HE Sigs HE. DOES, 4
- WITHOUT HELP FROM. vOriRM?™ THE GERWAN, GOI NG ALONG WITH THE
JOKE SAID, “OF COUSE NOT".
C. SUBJECT PRESENTED THE WHOLE THING AS A JOKE BUT WITH A
DEFINITELY MALICIOUS TWIST. .
. wba. d 2 gan
/

SECRET 201 2Esd i

PRIORITY DIRECTOR . ee

ee



--- Page 552 ---
14-0000

Sol

ROUTING AND/OM INITIALS - SEIN OY

Cusseta Magsent tora, Comes

SECRET vem tat oe

_fithen Fated bu Stee cre

eo pact Seca ramaT OrssEMinATON
FrasON UN SOTTO

a
Taacory E]one [L] nore

Cera Ree Pit BY.

coansiry tol Pun MoQde

kee re 5)

pier te

ay

~ av

enancm(] ocsrrov(] s10.

OSM By

PACE 2 MEXICO CITY. 9375S EC RET
THIS PROVOCATION OF HIS CONTACTS IS STANDBARD PRACTICE.

HE SEEMS TO HAVE A COMPULSION TO COME UP WITH

Dd.

WITH SUBJECT.
SLIGHTLY OFFENSIVE PROVOCATIONS. ths TwO WEEKS Ago AT A SIMILAR

LUNCH AT ANOTHER GERMAN, S HOUSE, HIS- PROVOCATIONS ‘F fou GERMANS

M ON NIXON'S VISIT TO BERLIN AND ELCTION OF PRESIDENT THERE LED - a
: “TO HIM INSULTING HOSTS AND LEAVING IN A HUFF SHORTLY BEFORE HE SO
y WOULD HAVE BEEN EVICTED. -

(2 By LIREALM FEELS THAT MAglts HARPING ON LIREALM'S WORK FOR -

7 WOFIRN IS ‘SUBJECT'S ‘STANDARD PROVOCATION FOR HIM (LIRELM AND WIFE

} ARE ONLY AMERICANS IN GROUP) AND THAT SUBJECT HAS NO HARD INFO
HOWEVER, LIREALM ALSO FEELS THAT

|) ABOUT HIS WOFIRM CCNNECTIONS.
ae IF SUBJECT IS ALLOBWED TO CONTINUE THIS PROVOCATIVE LINE WITHOUT ,
+ EFFECTIVE REBUTTAL, LIREALM CAN BE MADE TO LOOK TO FOOL IN THE) ~ ~~

GROUPS EYES. IN LIREALM'S ESTIMATE NONE OF GROUP SUSPECTS HIS

STATUS IN MEXICO BUT THINK THAT THE WOFIRM a NE IS JUST SUBJECT® s

te . , WAY OF PROVOKING THE ONLY GRINGd IN THE crfir.
tor
: ; 2. LIREALM ‘STATED THAT SUBJECT Is VERY GOOD IN DLSHING IT ouT -
TO EVERYEPAY But IRVARIABLY cones out A POOR SECOND . REPARTEE AFTER i

“DELIVERING INITIAL DIG.
EXBARKASSES EASILY.

HE CAN ‘NOT! iTAKE IT, is THe SKINNED » and

t

Se eee



--- Page 553 ---
14-0000

oo

Canct Sue arsaquy Desstunation C sto essa | Jota Comes ‘
TARTU MOREE .
v ET GROUPE .
se rae organ
“SECRI

a een ar

Ouse ov

yoo

o

om on

{When Filled mi

fea rect

REPRODUCTION CF Tres COPY y PROMAITED
iota ves OF 80
CLassiry TO FE NO

wtige TO FRE NO

rue mo Cast. to

omancn(] oestacy FD s10.

PAGE. 3 MEXICO cITy 9375 SECR. E T :
“3. PLAN  ourLiPeED PARA 4 REF WAS PRESENTED to ‘LIREALM WITH.

PROVISO IT IS SUBJECT TO H@S CONCURRENCE. HE WAS ENTHUSIASTIC SINCE

IT PARALLELS HIS OWN THINKING.
SILENCE SUBJECT, IS GUARANTEED TO THROW HIM INTO DEEP EMBARRASSMENT

“AND CONFUSION, AND- BURN HIM WITHIN THE GROUP SINCE LIREALN WOULD

LIKE TO aeAE neRoWA 04 WITH OTHERS PRESENT SINCE WHOLE GROUP
KNOWS | How SUBJECT NEEDLES HIM AND SEVERAL HEARD SUBJECT OFFER HIM
HONEY. STATION CONCURS IN THIS ADDITON TO PLAN. a .

4. HOWEVER, SUBJECT PREFERS NOT TO WALK-IN TO MR. SPRUCE SINCE
BuSiN65S, TRAE -

: HE" IS HIS ONLY SOUR CEE OF BUSINERYALIDE AND ADVICE a THE EMBASSY.

HE SUSPECTS THAT SPRUCE WOULD ATTEMPT TO PRY. THEA ORE, AGREED HE

MOULD WALK-IN TO SECURTIY OFFICER,. INDICATE THE NATURE OF HIS”
PROBLEM, ancAsSK TO TALK re A WOFLRM REP.

convins

34, STATION IS SEWWTNEE-B THAT PARA 4 REF PALW WITH ABOVE °

MODIFICATINONS WILL EFFECTIVELY TERMINATE SUBJECT’S PRGVOCATIONS,

IS PERFECTLY NATURAL FOR A PERSON 1M LIREALM'S POSNBUGGd AND WILL _

STRENGRIEN HIS COVER VIS-A-VIS HIS: AND SUBJECT’S MUTUAL FRIENDS.

THERFORE, URGE PRONPT H@S CONCURRENCE, ;
6. FILE: 281-77337 AND 201-285412..

SeEcRET

SECRET.

HE BELIEVES THAT IT WOULD EFFECTIVELY



--- Page 554 ---
ae : . . wbesaut sons
e TOTAL COPIES:

ore: L... MESTRES/mvb :
ae CySR/ XUN wr , SECRET
Date: ator ROL it 3 } 5 “ , . .

. er
TABLE SECRETARIAT O1SSLMINATION

OC aryan to

Oincer ; o we 08x

J (J rire ce rus Ko,

. aes a ina Tah
SECRET pan gw
Oe 0723 aA Nhe $9 CITE DIRECTOR

ws

“pismeatte:nro LIREALM AEDIEHARD AEXICK sbepaureas BhaE eA

“REFERENCES: A.. DIRECTOR- 81435
B. MEXICO CITY-9375 (IN 08492) |

an "MEXICO CITY-9381 (IN 98490). :
1; 201-285412 HAS BEEN ASSIGNED AEDIEHARD.
“2. THERE APPEAR TO BE TWO KEY OBJECTIVES WIIICH SHOULD BE .
THEY ARE:

SOUGHT IN THIS LATEST LIREALM/AEDI EHARD DEVELOPMENT.

A. PROTECT AND STRENGTHEN LIREALM'S COVER IN A NATURAL. v.
: ot

MANNER, AND So . . ..
. B. | OPERATIONALLY EXPLOIT AEDIFHARD'S AGGRESSIVE ATTI- . 9 ~~!

i TUDE IN POSITIVE TERMS so THAT STATION CAN" DEVELOP ADDI TIONAg

GENERAL CONCLUSIONS:
A. DESPITE HIS AGGRESSIVE ATTITUDE AND VISIBILITY,

” NOT APPEAR TO BE ANY SIGNIFICANT SUSCEPTIBILIT! 2S De w?
o1~ 28S 42%
. ,

- peoytasmen! aan)

ae i The 4
Aun taeda’

concen

con NO,

THER

~sweaeo

iowa] Y5)

BALIASING CPECES

REPROOUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OF FICE (S$ PRORIGITED.


--- Page 555 ---
oma:
wur:
art

. oats:

‘cap SECRETARIAT DISSEMINATION

pace TWO ; : ,

~ RALFASING OFFICER . CRET

ROUTING AND/OR Intel

MESSAGE FORM
TOTAL COPS:

L. MESTRES/myb-
C/SB/X/WH SECRET
6412 Wwe 27 dw FDRG

7 MARCH 1909

Gaal on ‘CD aera so 7 Lf

FILE 1 C8 PILE NO.

. tonie) ipice! 1
tetaseitication) {Gate and tine Wied) {reterence number} +

SECRET | - , cieomectoh =<) 9 3) 4
oo, Wo? ae

B. ‘HIS ACTIONS coULD BE INTERPRETED AS THOSE OF “AN RIS
OFFICER TRYING TO ATTRACT ATTENTION TO HIMSELF FOR ONE REASON .
OR “ANOTHER. HE IS NETTHEY } PARTICULARLY SUAVE NOR SUBTLE IN . 4

HIS PERSONAL RELATIONSHIPS , *YET HE IS CRAFTY, -QUICK on HIS 8 ;
FFET, AND MAKES” FAST DECISIONS AND ACTS ON THEM. HE Is : : “
* DEFINITELY. SOCIALLY ACTIVE AND MORE UBIQUITOUS THAN MANY :
"OTHER SOVIETS IN MEXICO, THIS VISIBILITY, HIS APPARENT .
_MOBILITY,. HIS KNOWN KGB AFFILIATION, AND HIS OUTWARD PERSON-
ALITY MERIT OUR> CONSIDERATION FOR PLACING HIM ON STATION'S .

PRIORITY TARGET LIST. . ; (0 a251)

< 4. WHILE THE PLAN OUTLINED IN MEXICO cITy 9356 AND FURTHER

_ MODIFIED IN MEXICO CITY 9375 WOULD EFFECTIVELY TERMINATE LTRE ALM/

io 4

" AEDIEHARD RELATIONSHIP AND CERTAINLY BE NATURAL ACTION FOR U. Ss.

- ‘BUSINESSMAN TO “TAKE™ “(CTHEREBY © IN HARMONY “WHT LIREALM'S ‘COVERY,

PERHAPS THIS. ACTION (REPORTING TO THE EMBASSY HIS CONTACT WITH
AEDIEHARD) IS NOT NECESSARY AT THIS TIME, WE OFFER THE FOLLOWING

ALTERNATIVE FOR STATION'S CONSIDERATION SUBJECT, YATURALLY,. TO
: (CONTINUED, 0)

AUTHENTIC ATIOD
Oreicen

Cary 0.

COORDINATING OFFICERS

REPRODUCTION SY OTHER THAN. THE ISSUING OFFICE IS PRONIBITED.


--- Page 556 ---
Ona;
unit:
Te

7 Race THREE

a a)

L. MESTRES/myb - =t ——t
cise/x/ait faye [- SECRET ft

MaRcH 1969

- MODIFICATION: = So , :

| wessace son ' : : NITHALS'» $8060 37
fem TOTAL At Comics: F :

Ono woe © reroan to eran Oo rump

oO won

Ite
oe aegis ae
“felnasifieationl {date and time filed) eterence number)

SE CRE Tr. ; cieomecton OY SSS

_ AL” LIREALM WOULD ATTEMPT AVOI D CONTACT AND COXVERSATION
WITH AEDIEHARD FOR NEXT FEW DAYS. ;
OB. THEN, AFTER PERHAPS ONE WEEK OR MORE, LIREALM WOULD
SEEK OUT AEDIEHARD AND ASK TO SPEAK WITH HIM ALONE... ;

Cc. LEREALM WOULD FIRMLY EXPLAIN TO AEDIEHARD THAT HE .
ENJOYS TALKING WITH HIM ON occasion WHEN THEY CHANCE TO’ MEET —
BUF THAT AEDIEHARD'S, CONSTANT. PUBLIC. NEEDLING, AND JOKING ,

ABOUT LUREALM'S. SUPPOSED CONNECTION WITH WOFIRM BAS CAUSING

_ _HIM EMBARRASSMENT IN MEXI.CAN/AMERI CAN BUSINESS COMMUNITY AND

HAD TO STOP, LIREALM WOULD TELL SUBJECT THAT AS PATRIOTIC
” AMERICAN CITIZEN HE HAD SPENT CONSIDERABLE TIME THINKING
‘ABOUT REPORTING THIS ‘CONTACT TO AMERICAN EMBASSY asd EXPLAIN-

ING TO U.S. OFFICIALS HIS PREDICAMENT VISA VIS AEDIEHARD'S

JOCULAR BUT. INSISTENT PUBLIC ACCUSATIONS.
" D. LEREALM WOULD THEN STATE THAT HE HAD NOT DONE SO FOR
THREE REASONS: :
. : (CONTINUED. . .)
. COORDINATING OFFICERS
seraamre commen s E Cc R E T ] [= =a | Auretanicana

REPROCUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE ts PRONIETTED. Coev o.


--- Page 557 ---
14-0000

396

come

_
i . a : vassact pons ROUTING ANO-ON INITIALS. 5 BEEN By
i . TOTAL TOMES:
ona: L, MESTRES/nvb ~ ,
cum C/SB/X/WH . . SEC RET
or 6412 . —_

bares 7\ MARCH 1969 :

“CASLE SECRETARIAT DISSEMINATION

Cenoen : Q NO INDEX CO atruan to

Once ce mneno, .—___—__—

getitey - ipice)
{dete and time tiled) - . (reterense number} - . |

creoinecton 5 /& 3) o:
F PAGE FOUR 7 7

——

(2) HE DID NOT WANT TO CAUSE: ENBARRASSMENT FOR
AEDLEHARD IN EVENT U.S. OFFICIALS WOULD TAKE SOME ACTIOK
EITHER THROUGH MEXICAN GOVERNMENT OR DIRECTLY WITH SOVIET
OFFICIALS. , me

(2) HE. DID NOT WANT TO CAUSE TROUSLE FOR HIMSELF IN
EVENT U.S.’ OFFICIALS DECIDED TO INVESTIGATE HIM. HE FELT
THAT REGARDLESS WHETHER THEY DID INVESTIGATE HIM OR NOT,

"THEY WOULD PLACE HIM ON SOME SORT OF “SUSPICIOUS LIST" AND

TiTS COULD HANDICAP HIS BUSINESS INTERESTS AND SOCIAL

RELATIONSHIPS WITH VARIOUS EMBASSY COUPLES WITH WHOM HE AND =~:

HIS WIFE WERE FRIENDLY. °

(3) HE SAW NO REASON WHY HE COULD NOY. CONTINUE TO SEE

AEDIEHARD SOCIALLY AS BEFORE BUT THAT HE KNEW THAT IF HE

REPORTED TO EMBASSY HE WOULD PROBABLY BE ASKED TO CEASE

“THIS CONTACT IN HIS BEST INTERESTS AND THOSE OF THE EMBASSY.
E. LIREALM NOULD THEN ASK FOR QUID PRO QUO, “LET US

CONTINUE AS FRIENDS, SUCH AS LEONOV AND I WERE, BUT DROP THIS

COORDINATING OFFICERS ( conTE NUED. *« .)

. vu
ba todos bee evtemerig AUTHENTICATING
on aaLeasing OFFER SECRET tommeyetiog wt orescin

REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE 3S PROHIBITED. . Cory MO.
’



--- Page 558 ---
. . . .. . wrssace ronw t ROUTING AND. OR PAITIALS + SEEN OY
. . * TOTAL COPS:
wo: L. WESTRES/myb : ; 3
ies C/SB/X/WH. : SECRET
m 6412 oo. -
are: 7 MARCH 1969
: DOLE SECRETARIAT DISSEMINATION CO moex () wo wnoex OD «ervan to = BRANCH Dene no

O ene in ca ers no,

— ; _ : : - jevete) ince) ) .

~ ae (classification) . (ate and time tited) Welerence camber
SECRET . , . , ‘ CITE DIRECTOR D4
oe BI83 )

te TRACE FIVE

. SPY’ ACCUSATION BUSINESS OR I WILL HAVE.NO RECOURSE BUT TO
PROTECT MYSELF AND REPORT TO THE _ENBASSY."
5. THIS ACTION ON THE PART OF LIREALM IS IN PERFECT HARMONY
WITH ACHIEVING OBJECTIVE NUNBER ONE: PROTECTING AND MAINTAINING
LIREALM'S COVER. HOPEFULLY IT WOULD SET STAGE FOR CONTINUING
CONTACT WITH AEDIEHARD ON PROFITABLE BASIS SO THAT WE CAN PROFES- ,
SIONALLY ASSESS THIS SOVIET WHICH FULFILLS THE SECOND OBJECTIVE.
’ WE EVALUATE LIREALM'S REPORTING ON HIS SOVIET CONTACTS AS ACCURATE,
-»,. LUCID, AND USEFUL. | THE RECENT SPB os AEDIEHARD COMPLETED BY:
LIREALM IS POSITIVE STEP IN RIGHT DIRECTION. HOWEVER, SHOULD

AEDIEHARD PERSIST WITH HIS GAMES PLAYING WE HAVE NOT CLOSED ‘DOVR

“@N LIREALM GOING TO THE EMBASSY AND ‘CARRYING OUT ACTION DESCRIBED
IN STATION. MESSAGES. THUS THIS OPTION STILL VALID.

6. APART FROM SEEKING TO OBTAIN ABOVE OBJECTIVES BY TAKING

THE INITIATIVE WE ALSO AVOID A LIREALM WITHDRAWAL FROM AEDIEHARD

WHICH, NO MATTER HOW WELL PLANNED, SOVIETS WOULD PROBABLY SUSPECT

s .
‘ : :
a AS -SOME FORM OF DEFENSIVE ACTION ON LIREALN'S PART IN VIEW OF HIS ‘

2 : no

‘ . coorpinanina ornicens eee TINUER, ) :

(Leasrao Gesrcee 7 ot wsseetis AUTHENTICATING :

ate ; . SECRE T (esate pace seca :

com no. :

REPRODUCTION BY OTHEN THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE S PROHIGITED.



--- Page 559 ---
TED as per

5
be
&
i
zp
E
£

é
£.
n
bee
fe

.F

“ MESSAGE FORM
TOTAL COPS:

ma: J, MESTRES/myb... [ TS ECR = nd
iar? - C/SB/X/WH . : SECRET

ae 612 oo ; —.
faoLe SECRETARIAT DISSEMINATION | .
eo | 0) race inc rue wo.

Dent aw

OC nvex , oO #0 INDEX Q RETURN TO... BRANCH

in a os
a Fue. va. na . ee
b Tetoseiication)- (eave ond thee tied) ; ‘peterence monte my
F SECRET Oo 0 crreomecron «3 / Z 3 )
: 7 4

wo Vpace six:
EXPOSURE. BY- SUBJECT. ‘ACTION SUGGESTED THIS MESSAGE KEEPS CONTACT
OPEN, WE MAINTAIN INITIATIVE, DOES NOT PRECILUDE TAKING DEFENSIVE

» ACTION IN FUTURE SHOULD AEDIEHARD STUBBORNLY PERSIST, AND IS NATURAL
ULTIMATE

x

FOR SOMEONE LIKE LIREALM GIVEN THIS SORT OF SITUATION.
OBJECTIVE HERE 1S FOR STATION TO DETERMINE THROUGH CONTINUED CONTACT

PLUS ADDITIONAL ACCESS TATLORED TO LIREALM ‘S(NFORMATION WHETHER CR
NOT A PLANNED DEVELOPMENTAL EFFORT AINED AT RECRUITNENT SHOULD BE
ac neat wer

2
G

INITIATED. oo .
Sag esa MADE with F Reet,
7. SHE ABOVE PROPOS A SEEHEEFE St

—_
F Pras STATION IS IN BEST POSITION TO DETERMINE WHETHER OR NOT
P THIS TYPE OF EXPLOITATION OF Contact WITH AEDIEHARD CAN BE EFFEC- |
[. TIVE IN TERMS OF FURTHER PROFESSIONALLY ASSESSING THE TARGET AND. i
E IN CONSIDERATION OF LIREALM'S OTHER OPERATIONAL ACTIVITIES. IN NO ~
i WAY DO WE WISH TO HAVE. THIS ACTIVITY GONFLICT WITH’ LIREALM'S
|” ABILITY TO SUCCESSFULLY CONDUCT HIS OTHER PRESENT OR PLANNED
| $s OPERATIONAL EFFORTS. So
: ; (CONTINUED. . .)
Boa .
. . oe : COORDINATING OFFICERS oie
‘ _ tenga ormess -- SECRET. iret maori
A REPRODUCTION SY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE 1S PROHIBITED. coer NO,



--- Page 560 ---
. . . a . | . rzssane rome . 0
2 t : TONAL COPIED: i
aL. MESTRES/mvbd \ "
ie SR/X/WH SECRET
an 6412
ML7 MARCH 1969 8 ne SS ooo
ARLE SrCRSTARIAT DisscMnaTON, , In oer DO no wroex OO setuan to 2 cnancn Clone are :
’ man ‘° Chriemesmneno,

: . : _ fereey gptce) ©
. aan {éete end time filed) . {retereace oumbor)

; (cisusWicattond
s ECRET! cite pinectoa S133) o,
- a TV

to CPAGE SEVEN |
i

8. WELCOME; STATION COMMENTS AND/OR MM

ODIFICATION S$ TO AROVE
PLAN. jo ‘ ;

9. + FILE: 201-285412, 201-773337.
END OF MESSAGE

HQs. COMMENT: References: concern discussions For operational |
. exploitation of LIREALM/AEDIEHARD relationship. an

spici/o4 ? Vepase’
SB/X0_ 0.4 D2/. ;

. C/WH/1 feud ~ ,
clLPoine Ullaga~

7 6
6 ae f ete
< Perea fa ‘
> Ets ;
: 1
‘ : COCROINATING CH FICERS . :
RELEASING CSECER ( SEC R ET | [ese Leora Avmenricaning
Nn ed =
REPROUUCTION SY OTHER T4AN THE ISSUING OFFICE ” PROHIBITED. Core ad


--- Page 561 ---
14-0000

ote
my . |
; SECRET
‘
REQUEST FOR CODE DESIGNATION ve
: Fut ot in duphicate . : , ‘ .
i toe
-
S SCRIPTION OF PROWCT OR AGENT (what, where, wie, ctC1 . .
: igs Hoes. Soviet * cer in Maw les
STAFF EMPLOYEE
: i
- : :
eK . a we Lo .
a wee oe cn RYE
THIS PORTION IS DETACHED AND THE ABOVE IS SENT TO ;
z CABLE SECRETARIAT ON CRYPTONYMS OMLY THAT WiLL Lf.
$ HAVE CABLE TRAFSIC : . 5
: TRUE NAME
‘
FUE NUMBER (201, Project, Substctl
eer A
Teo 26lt SECRET wa _



--- Page 562 ---
14-0000

MESSAGE FOmM

he TOTAL COmiEs:
one: L. MESTRESMIAL_-

unt * CSB/X/WH a

. om 31S

i pans 6 MARCH 1959

case secervaniar’ ‘USSEMINATION oe Climex » no wax () aarvan ro —_____._ saanen One av

———— - 83 Satins OE a,

7 + IMMEDIATE MEXICO CITY |‘ ; ue
" gSEiMRRARD REDTOP LIREALM AEKICK Aepeaaue ta
= ~~ we

° | REF: MEXICO CITY 9356 (IN p7sia) c

ed

1. PLEASE (CABLE DETAILS 6 MARCH DEBRIEFING AS SOON
AS AVAILABLE;
an 2. IN INTERIN LI

GUIDANCE RECEIVED FROM X ARC
"AVOID CONTACT WITH LOGINOY, IF POSSIBLE, UNTIL WE HAVE
COLLECTIVELY REVIEWED a

ACTION... oS
me 3. REVIEW OF LoG "Ov FILE REVEALS COMPLEX PAST HISTORY

OF DEALINGS WITH MEXIcA}S AND oTHERs WHICH WARRANT ANALYSES.

FOR POSSIBLE PRESENT EYPLOITATION OF LIREALM. DEVELOPMENT

WITHOUT EXPOSING HIS TIUE .NOFIRM STATUS.» WILL ADVISE. 6 .May 4,

fa)
4. FILE 201-773637, 201- -285412. “seattonrepbi cae Svddidre
ade to LI LM by ’

ry
- END OF MESSAGE - LOGINOV

sB/CI/OD a= - osYrx0_€ Zale lin WIN LOG, Lowe. a
Faen \ Co gs a + Couspinanaa orrceas 7 sa/cbvs _| WE re
SECRET set] mo

STATION VARIOUS ALTERNATIVES FOR

cuwse

BELEAS ING OFFICER

con ea,
“4 .


