
--- Page 1 ---
1 104-10069-10077|

[2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |

hey

: a

Deen
°

OP “6 )3 244,087
Lh 3037h

27 Noverber 1962
i - Lo gubjeet: * Reported Use of Yacht Potomac by Alpha 66
i : rns are “ .

On 20. ‘Nov € ‘LAFO received an unsolicited telephone call or the
Usted * telephone numoer. ‘The caller wanted to advise that there was reportedly
dn the harbor at Long Beach a vesse)., formerly used by the late Theodore
Roosevelt, called the Potomac. This vessel, according to the informant, was

. being used by the Alpha.66 organization. She was believed taking on e carge
of weapons crated as Argentine beef, and destined to leave soon for veattle.
He added that a Wes Davis had just signed on as an engineer, and there vas
enother character named c1irt Roberts on board. Both were descrited as tearded
. adventurers. ee s

Loge

2.-The caller refused to “Adentiry himself, claiming that ke did not

lmow whether contact with the Agency would be approved by his employer, and

further cid not know whether or not the Toe. as valid o or of intergst. el, l
: essin

3. In ‘response to. a call tothe Intelligence Officer, ULCG, it was loarned

. . that ther is a vessel, the Potouac, formerly one of the 155" USCG cutters.
“< For gome time.it had been used by the late F. D. Roosevelt as the presidential
- “yacht. Later 4t had been disposed of to the Maryland (State) Fish and Game
' Commission,. and more recently it had been acquired by the Hydra-Capital, inc.,
410 West Coast. Highway, Newport Beach, California (OR 5-1549).

as usce: advised further that. an investigator for the Los Angeles County
Prosecutor, D..L.‘Wheeler, had accepted an assignment (taking leave of absence
to do so) to bring the -Potomac’.from the Barbados to California. The plan,
supposedly, was to make ‘her a ‘floating museum of some sort.

I On his arrival
in Bartados, Wheeler is reported to have found the craft in foul shape, with

only.a-.single engine. operative. 3 3 g
The craft later, however, did ‘turn“up in San Diego in Octover and was later
baeryed tiedip in: Cerritos. Channe] 3

: She
an : appears tobe’ ‘undergoing s

modifica to L
As dex of Veet Ball / id Lt 4, at
ana 4 and 2), subsequently identified
vas re-contacted by telephone. Th Was

actiyity came his way, we @ would
appreciate another ail : cation ears the statement
hat it was his.understanding that the Cliff Rovérts he eferred to pre-
‘viously had come. from Barbados with the vessel y) This was' et spivak ag): first

: reference ” to Barbados. : ; Ss Or

J

6. The above’ is. for your information only. The sketchiness of the material
~ “presented LAFO ag well asthe circumstances of its origin militate against its
_ eredibility. As:a consequence, no follow-up is anticipated unless requested,

» WAETURN
Backgrownis. Ui y
‘Bo Not Reprocuce


