
--- Page 1 ---
14-gudga
104-10171-10138 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |

OFFICIAL IDISPATCH »

DIDPAT ON ovra- qos

win _
. SECRET
i Seourlt7 Infercatica .
. : : HEATON :
te Chief, 68 DATE 3 February 3553
ter. en
~ Paom, _ Calef of Station, ver ,

suasect Orntear
~~ a ° Pid tala

Frits (eka Frod) snScd
Refercsca: * Stato Dupt Coatrol Cable 1437, 1h Nov $2, froa Boon

1. Ga ld Juco 52, tha Prosa Attscha'c? the Perlis Prbascy vrote us

tha following esaorendsa:

| &ccoming to Fronea mecerds, Fred SLO was bora Lay 31,

’ 1sc3 ta Borlin. Ky vas treinol 62 a levyor, left iracay ta

- 1931, end eppcared ia France ia lyg3. In 1939, bo enlietsd

. da tho Ferelga [egica. Sons tics to 19L0, ba was eexodilisad
19 Korocco., Ha fled to Saitsarlend ta 1942, cod roterzed to
farta ia Lay lyby. Sinca thas ting, by boo vorzad fcr “Blo
Test" tu Zurich, “fibora Stsspa,“ a Scalolist catly io Leyano,
end othor papora. Ia 1949, ba weat to work for “DLs Calt,?
ths Britich-coutrolled nesepaper in Ucchurg. Is Pebreary 1951,

‘ by wes rplecad ca that popor by 9 Gorcan. . AG tha preszat
tics, ba works for “Radlo Sarrebres! 2 ta tell as fcr "bar
Bust." Ka wag naturalised Franch in 1947.

. Esosatly, bo vas clogred by SEAFE to cs2 evorzthicy froa
tha Pyrocces to the Elbo. Hs did co end ecco o ropers ca

° { ind Atleaite Poreca, Fila articles wory coasicared Of by tha
waoh, cad chia tere translated to tho procs review bullstin,
*bocamatatica," .

Scor tins sftor ths erticlss h:d ezposred, however, a
Freach cificiol caprocssd esteaiebosst that SUDCS bed bssa
Cives cu2h tics eccrvditatias. Tisagh be mid aa pres? to
. etfer, tila enc officicl ecco tha statsocat thas $Moust
. wes biswa to the Frosch 09 o2 econt of the Cocinfvora. hy
: cave co furthoy derogatory infercaiiaa,

2, Wo esorcbed car Mttea, found no previcas recerd cf Bdjact, od
infcrazd the Fresa &itccha sooordingly.
CF Feh os

f SECRET

_ /ovigae pin :
; . | ORT. temiirpety de SY gag? t
Ne. . :
x


--- Page 2 ---
yenn009

3. Ga 27 Nos $2, tha Pross attests called cur attcation to”
State Tapes Centro) cable 1437, frva Esza, cated 14 Nev 52, a copy —
+ of whics 1s Sttached hereto for your ccavenicasa. Basing cur res. ee
‘quest ca the ‘inforeation contaizsd ta para} adove, cad on the a
ettaccad colle {rod Bont, we susaitted queries soncorming Sudject
to dotN UNION ex. UNBOUND.

Te, &. ca 23 Jeo 535 ws recoivad ths foligeing reply | frow. UNBOUND:

Feits (eka ‘Tred) SNS, ters 31 & 1903 Ya Dorlia, |
of Gesesa origin, ths cca cf Wiltr-cad ForthyTULaa, =... ,
g2ised Froach naticaatity uy raceralteation cal épril |
ie. va ly Osteter 1933 ta Faris Uda, ‘ba carried hla.
ceczatriot rae STRIBU, bora 24 bupust 1905 in Borlin.
They cave one child, 25 bay 1937, of Freacd tattoa-
ality. hed

. S, dthe Foratca Logica in asto end pas do- .
' | ; exhilicad 15 FoSruary 1ss1.” Ia Lesuod 1842, fearing loot
° ha bo istonisd ia a corp ta the ccoscrpied tone, ha Ge” bere omen oe
eidsd to go with hio ult to Sait. sorlend. Upcra his ex
rival da SultcsPlend, be wea errestsd for clendsstina .
ii _ borésmorosaing aod intorcad in 2 comp at Kays:
. > @Veletg), Lator, ba waa treasferred to @ ter oor = ot
, Sterso. Duricy bla otay ia Suitsariccd, te ellegadly
,  &xeto sovoral erticlaa uccsr the pesccooya “Bocai* io
tha Saica soolalist praga, cotsly ia tha pays? “Libora-

Staxpae*

Ya Bay 1945, hoe rotaiesd to Fregea ead cateled ct
Uentroegs (Soica), whore bo shill recieza ab 2) Avescce .
Flerny Erogcolatta. Since i545, ba Ea bed a legal office .
eS €) rua d'Hsatevitts, Farts loa, tana, ecconiing too :
wrsclly relicdle esurce, 25 is nspertcd te havo bald
H2gtngs whlte KeastaatiEAMsnad cf tis Sovios Comarcial

ca (ete = eco et) 11555) end WIth LUQGHTST of tho
Sovtes lnfercatios Burcca. Yba cstivity of this legal
effica iu, ia fect, aluosi ncgligidla.

, Sinca 1$L5, bo eloo bas opsrated 2a ¢ffice for tha . ‘
estticscat ef dieputed cliizy for ths intermaticcal on : ,
Recerv cad Rolter Conaltics’ (1.8.3.0.), 35 Bad. dos oe *

Ceputissa, Ferlo. ha equclly 40 scctuistrater of the

fira“veas end Sluit" of dnteerp, Solsisa.

“SBORET
Security inforcatioa



--- Page 3 ---
14-00000

AL

ad ~
ej.

S050 cavotos ths creator part of hia activity, howwwr, |
to Jearmalica. Eg £3 a cofrespeacint of verjous French end
forolia esscpupora, notably tha Guica pezoy”"bor baad." Ko
ia ecerocited officially to the Freach Liatotry of Inforcatica.

Ra Baa citeired mazorcus viess for foroign countries in omar
to fulfLll hie professional obligations.

Ko b39 covor attracted ettendica {rca tha political point |
point of vicw, bat ca cuspoot hiu of tuing iccntical ith an ©
indivicaal of ths casa neta who balengod to ts Suisa “Bote
Eapolle* notwore. _——

SUS04 1a in costaot with a ean naccd BURCELANOT fate -.
es0 para $ tolew), now a corretpoadsas of "Lar Lusd" in :
Paric, end who elo ia mepsctod of being identical with an pet

Ox-egaat of tha "Rote ‘Kepallo. .

we oro sontiming our invootigaticn of Frits SDEa.

5. Gita regard to tha BURCIOMM? esaticnad ebova by wero, vo
oince have cccswited with tho Prege Attecks, who has tsoa able to ideo-
tify hin eg fo}esa: tase a es leo.

vals ae 7

teat LURCITARD?, bora 9 Sopteztor 1506 in Lehr, Goveany, -
potccably rosiding ab 103 Bvd. Voltaire, Pario lla, cccneatc”
corzccpcacsab for "Dor Band," eccrodited a9 a journalist to
ths Proaiccacs ¢3 Concoil ca lO Fubruary 1545, elco vorks
fcr tha Voroinigtea Virtcchafta Dienct of Frankfurt, ia
kecoa cz a carious journalist, but otherviss ay a coadtful
individual,

6. Oak Fed 53, va recoived tha following loss coxploto reply = +
from UUlOd:

Frits (eta Fred) OU004, forrorly a Gorean le=jor, to

_ Pofega in Frense i 1933. Es boy opcacd o legal clfico in
Faria cad alco oscupica Miccolf with jourcalics. Catil now,
no unfavorible inforcatica hsa boon cbtaited eencorming hit.

a Tes cre cating 411 of tho ehove intorzation availsdls to doth
- tho Extescy Fross Attechs ead to SEAR. Wa would epprocisto receiving
ol] possible further corcjutory inforeatica ceacernicg SSC, blo .
variozs ccotcata, cod his cativiting. Vs vould be intorested to receiv,
in particulcr, ony inforzatica to cufisa UULOTD's earpicion that
sisai, exd/or BURCERARD?, wood to belazg to tha “Hote Kepello® Retwork.

Digtributioa: , Ag. afheot
Wach: 3 Brus: 3 “WWoyd D. Langer
Freaks 1 Barus :

Borli 1 Regis: 5 .
. ar asad ol D 2095



--- Page 4 ---
14-0000

e.

ahs Whe meine
steut oiibtary dine
perme Ver tek ctae
just for bare te.

foaures tn oe.

CUE Ny
pulltoter Paul Haupt,
aber we bene

fagon's
wetivities Ju tr

rants.

Sarupe? wrt

BO mies otc iy



--- Page 5 ---
14-0000

v .
,
. i
- !
* 4 . .
. .
} 7 ah = :
va CATR shar °
me cniet, UHD 6 fatear ITy
ATT.a chief, re/? . Lo.
: prow Calaf of Waites, Ric 40 Jenrire : Thro 8h Paws
cannes, (grarotaenat/OTACALIS
nlp . : “ ’
er ibe leterregation of bnaoicn faigrente freo Shisw to pedal
Tremeettted neneel th in tripiicste tus ge = prepaimei wees ene
by Whilime We BEVEL. TUT ¢sseertad ne laee Urkerrogatl 2} of Tica
i + golgeente fees (tik beestl. .
i a - wow ete cee we ee
i tere G, saftey ”
'
| Abtociawats J-pege aie, iu triplicate
i Dietrivetion .
i B+ Koadyguarterd; wokt 6 noted
iy 2 - bdo Faula, wert. a: nove!
! 4. Biles, wate, .
: ea r 1 .
Ay Kas
!
eee : i .
i :
a Q . fibut:-A- 1 7Ge |
oe :
es H
1
poe
it
2



--- Page 6 ---
14-0000

On 23 October, Marcos EtsT03, AESUATIN' | collene ia ths Bragliten Federal
Folitical Folica, fvfarcod hia that o7 15 Cetodar ba had cctaittad to tha
Catof of Polica-a Wahalstion of tha reports ha hii rocaived fro RMTHY » "
(LiSNS had bead give ty, bear ptartiiced weratcos of RE=2 to Hael5, -- . | .
ote,
‘

™.

| faslusive, end KA-17 to L2-29, inclusive, elons wits Ga biographical trforeation
. if of the earces of thoaa. reports. Rl-15 end RG-30 wore cot passed to BASTOS
: Dscsuzs thay had beat chtainod from ALLOFATHT.)
2. Cn 27 Gctcbor BSNS taforced ALUN that tha translation of ths ‘Feport
ned fh; a3 forwariad ty tha Catof of Folics to Colic) LictReLDO, the presoat
baet-of the Fedoral seseal Folica in Eig da vengiiv, Sy, res turpa, hod a .
forwanicd it to Sood FICOLL, becd of tha Political Diviston of ths Folitical .
Polica, for hia recoccanlations, BL) statal that be bellewsd FICS
would recossoal that tha reports be fcrwanlol to ths Foroim Offics emi tha
Var Kintotsy. BSNS also inton’s to. give.a copy of tho tenet srions to *
Ribstra ca Maps, bs2d of the Sarvicts da Vigtlancha of the Dezarteont of . ‘
Political ani Se. cad Urdor (D.0.P.8.), Sio Paclo, who bas tniicatel an interest

da rocalvirg ite
3. Ag en introduction to ths trenaiatioa of tha reverts, LASTOS Cascribed triefly
Drosil's Statologs rotugca tratgrotivo probles asd tha volustery cvlfare

orgenizabions wich esaigt the iralyrente tu gaining entry to, acai settling -
in, Prasit. Tha trasalation of this introductica te 42 followss |

®fha current imigratioa of Vnito Russians date Erasil began 19 195, It
hoz Gintatched pincs Jena 195) in tha feca of tho dectaton texen ty tha
Eationa) Institute of Colcbisation ent Imigration (Instituto Bactanal de .
Ieigragze ColonisezZa) {1 C.) 00 16 Juna WSL. Ua that cate, the . .
Directorates of tho N.ILI.C, dcoided to reqiest that the Uintstry of Foreiga

Relations toke ths nocescary otcpa to stops ths issuanca cf vicas for
gtatcless Peroons rox a poriod of sixty cays.

®Ca 39 Juns, Vicento RD, thou Foreign Kintster, sont a circ:lar to ell the
ecasulstes entering a stoppage in tho docusace of vices until a final

- ¢ doctaton could bo ¥ reachxl.
#33 €2 Soptesbar, tha Foreign Offica iscaad | beg ths conmslates tem instractions,
ecoemlicg to tate, consrally epocins, stateless isaigreats ere percitted

. i entry to Erasil caly if thoy have ia Eeaaii relatives in tha direct lity of
descent shoge ocomalc situation ts such that tha cain geareatae ts .

eadsistonce of the iralgrants.

Biro ny


--- Page 7 ---
14-0000

Or et |
e ‘ a . L mo . mo .

Meverthsloss, 4t cay te noted that
ia Hore, orgs with chate ve recpective pa
{ td tha ees

see 9 acccmadatisas
the “missovarie, .

Phe diffi sities. , wish tho international organicatisc3s enoountar tb obtataing
coxplete and roliatito 6 forcattoa on te ienigrents ere cio to a lores citent
to tha fect that thee iretgreats elecys recite iv areas far vod fra
tin locales of the organizations’ offices. Gro cust alas rec athe f

fact that included exci tha stateless immigrants is a large cisber of ad f

Poraont useful. to brasil, mich 29 tho followin: types of. Sorkoraa sochanics, - Le

engineers, electricians, chealets, otc. we

"Thora are teelve tntemiattonal: organications who are tesporatble tor: propar ing
the ieatgraits for tha Jourray - or better, tho cilt - of thoga stateless
Tofugeos froa China sd-variougs Loropean. countrics, Thsy eres :

she AeduD.Se ~ Anoricaa Joint Distribution Comalttoe, with offices fa Rio
ani Sao Poulos

2. £.0.1. ~ Entr*ALio Uurriore Internatforiale (International Workers’

Lutwal Aid)

3. HT. AS. - Usbrow imaugrant Aid Socioty, with offices in Rio ant So .
Paulo.

be LeC.theCe + International Catholle Migration Gazclesion, with offices . ;
in 24> end Sco Foulo. .

Se 1505. = Intoreation:) Sct Service, with offices in Eis an! Sto Faulo.

I.R.Ce = Internation Yoscue Camittce. Hia no represcatatives in Brasile

» ~ Lathoran Vorid Federatioa, with officas ia Rio ext Séo Peulo.

CoU.C, ~ National Catholic Welfare Conferems, with offLtos in Rio«

an) Slo Faxlo. -
Ge She E. - Suiog Ald to Ewepa. tas 1 ropresontatton. in Erasil.
= Tolotoi Founlation, with offices in Kio ent Sto Paulos |

\

10.
11. u U.sA.K.C. ~ United Uirentan dcoricen folior tomalttoa,
Lee. W.C.C. — World Council of Ciarchaa, with offices in Rio cad Sis Peulo. .

"Two of thooe organicatioas honJle tha lergost mucbar of errivals. Ono
is tha W.C.C. wlovo office in Rio ix locited at Frala d& Plex, if,
Cpt. €62; it3 office in Sio Fevlo tz ct fia D. Voridiana, 370. yp SS
Pealo office ia unter tha direction of Lisa Rachel co CARVALLO. (

othor crganisation ts us NeSoMLCe, uhooe offico in Ro is ot leomen
Churchill G0; its offices tn Sis _Paulo ig in tha Church of Peaca (igreja
da Fas) on hap, Fi iserio. Tha So Psulo offics 1a usidor tho direction of -
Fathor Karto.(3

"Since 25 Asril 54, cay stateless Yersons wiv havo bsea enable to vbtain
a visa for Eractl, Cancta or Australia have bean repatriated to tha U.S.S.4,
As 0 rosult of this rvpatristica, it ig poosibla, though mit proboblo, that
sore olesunta may be ocnt Ava China to breatl to engig2 in cubsersiva
activities hore, while cuaburs of their fantltes, who hara becn repatriated
to Russia, are held as hostages thore.?



--- Page 8 ---
14-0000

_ Fofsgeas With ontsy visas for Brasil issued prior’ to 30 ad WS. ere tn
“Heeg }

“gonswssentis Dologate of W.C.C. for all Latin America ead, in tiie capacity,

“e eA “‘Comonts

te RIQD-8L6 reported om 2 October ws thee about 6 Fch stateless .

; waiting for traisportation to Brasil. She feye.d.

The: head of tho W.C.C. office in Rio is André MOVRATIESF, eno

ia Xis8 CANVALUC'S ouperiure .
3. The nead of tus Necetece ‘in Rio ts Waltor Dw! SHHTES. tho ts ths overals

nasi of N.C.W.C. activities in Brasil, in witch capacity be de Father Mario's
Superior. DUSHIYCK's chlef assictant is Rio to Mico Adazaids da Coste ADEVEDO..



--- Page 9 ---
Eh. Jlimame - Faron |
. . wanes. Qwdet \qa
leo» Yb

MEE Osa

>
| | aA
EOI, =
7 ~
te

tL a” “.
WER SLCLE



--- Page 10 ---
14-0000

ws

—
se, -
ost arn rxtorwarton
a FLY . oo
12. Jirnuary 1952
wfree  Frengns Fardg

of Fagen, Me
w—tepart aie tz. duster Petersen

Distribution

ao

desig te

Pllest WY
UunerengaRr
rep - OOF :
A 54 4.1.0.5 ces

ani Comments.

Bource, Operational Lota,

Subjects Joooph LEGRAND Roaceigned

Comosnt: For tracce on the individusls namo in
tho attached eca the folloming
LEXUND - T7706 i) and othore
Gary, Balle ~ B79) bron Boh8
ROI, jar set - at Ce ae
DEW OOSS, UFC) KFO-WWSp wO-5)F
wens tne) = @e- + wR mm tg
LEU, Charles - EPPAWTP6S ond others

+e

| Chaseiticotion ESSEDI/GINTRES © UL2E CFIC CLT

so es i Ga ;
Hares i 1g. 9-¢ 'S9



--- Page 11 ---
14-0000

« . ,
seat sBRITY reeoaTiCN
CONT OLS. OFF IC'ALG ONLY a
Feport to: WP S928

Date of Information: Current

Gudjoet: Jogopn LE. UND -

- . .
" Ploce Acquired: Vrance, Yaris Dete acquired: A January i952"
, Gvaivetioa: wey . Date of Report: 12 January 1yS2
i Cource: tTnevugh « fairly relianle sourve few an inforauns with eh contacta,

ade doserO Ea stD, fow)ved tn tha SPronntor affair® end aa a rosult
oxpaiiet fia tha Ceatral (asalttes of tia FUP in tha Spring of
3S], €a9 recsatiy re-saaimed tha position es Adalnstrative
Gecretery cf tia Regt-nal Uinara Felspatica (COT) in the Kord
Aaguate POCO was dnatrimental in

and FasetoeCalata rocioss.
scluring Gia reazaiguent for Lea2ud, aceoniing ta gource,

a

2. xCt2: (Lsca) exc hOS= (Lalo) who wora tn oharca for ty years
ef tha reorcsatgatiog of tha Kygtcnal Pedoration hava been placad
enter Lval'e orcera anid have besa charged with Sinsuffielens —_

action",
EPL bsg boca givca "full pocara® to vinit al] ssTulseatso end
to elizinzis tesa Oo oolescata fucdtgad unnacsseary, recuoing

J crgsatcrs of tha various eyndicatea, 2 otatod
rc {9 eotivitios era sartially usotated by finanstal t .
ssaaity end Ut otaffs will ba reduccd for econcaso reacona, : so

+

Sousa,

LPs (firs), Cocrotory of tha wincra! oyrlicata of Conain (Mond),

bra bora shargsd with roorgsaicing tha Valsnofcansa costor, in
partseulas the Cyplecuzsloccus reaica, wich "nor Pollen ints . ;
other? €2 0 result uf tha tnsrita cf tha traite FOU (Cale) %
Accordirg 2 soured, Quit, fescar Cocruccsy Osnefal of tha einssa
CGO? egeoata Ly dasha, bas Scr ecco tics boon in ding fcr

% ef lacs of disstpling and incespatenca fa
Vosaver, mo cad waatcd ty taks Cra reopongibility
Via Sirus oot porfurced by LEQUID di hio mz .

,

Cheziseal £9 4 rei
esecteata efvuira.
fer cieadooing hin,
poostisa waa WG) Cire bias

S$. EXIT peccadly Golered Chat ba el-> hea Leen cdven SUL) posse
to Pcs Gircre oysticatsa end CEP LIOUS (Chapica) 011) nod x
bo a Gof wunlicata tn tra recut olootiona Car einsiy! Calszatzas ' bad
2 . . !
i '
i ? » +
. r ‘ . [
7 .

Clases fioesica SECIST/CONTRCL = Ud, CHFICIALS OMLY

Mrarong carp REPRoDicTiang

: 9-9-1159 | oy

+ #9 ©.
saa acy OND



--- Page 12 ---
14-0000

fe

. sy hy oe
. aa ; : .
, ” te ov ‘ _ .
. - . . ~ - ca ‘
* 4a a
. = ‘ OFFICIAL Dis PATCH SF
, - : —_ - Liswatin vo aioe soe
a . . ri aesie ation . ° >
in Gites of Svation, Furie #47 rr
‘bw : Sadak, WE ;
SUBJECT ssrmy. ioieric SIOE ~
stows) y Pedte SSO . N
. koe GPhers by Ferman, 215

# 1, Tha felheowly iter. sation or Prod » ddifeved to bu
Aadontical with your Lu St, hea hoo. tr 3 dyer a rev report in
wean revolved tres xn iol depreced comrco fa tha Popt Germu: Gevernaent",
. und trensalttod to howlquartery in NOD eli, RY Mang. 1.555

eric SES

Acdrouas
Profession; Jexuryolivt, cant: atly serti
. tebbos uowupapor * hor Wunt",
aod "Dh UML", ani ef "RiYto $e ul
A polit soy deur etal parson vo. Teculved a)
visu ver Wat vernal y velit Vor sic
5 40 infericat! ty
Sa hy), snsci Woo voting fer the Cacasiust
iunsenbarcer) lefere tho var
Carunist pauape: peo > “De sath,
wy. “Le

FESS ouracee

“ahaa La WU
fea ~



--- Page 13 ---
14-00000

GsieS.2,) cal, therefore, Gaclerilitp in tha ILRR.C. chal bo viowd with

v .

‘ .
- . . Sues en | : .

efterc, vadivotiing foo Gerona wesspomre, Lasver,

ig Costthad, eteting that La elo Lod presd ia isa .

epic. Ma Nets |tetcd Gist ba “ . - :
=o Fisia entat a ~

“ef opiates wtta Fok LOSSLI
: isa qcccucr wea Eat yor ¢.
. ealy Incsitcs! Sy Comell, 9 tos Postel p.
Guwring bis heeaad ecaferensas
2 bad power forgiven ila ros tale. . .

r= salasten to datorvicw

WY:
Tee vcs Et
de> £o lar pasacenl

a eee
TS

ea tho fash thst
ase to wat

ia Tera, cul a cobpoo
with BYALA os allcyaie

oo nov do Vora ca coentcte carrerpaaic. for "ger Dunit, .
LSHAD? nentdenod in tho "Fina EQUAL Roport? :

4. khdeh otatons

3. Tho tina BiRe:
Sebebly dy dicutical vith the
hae, Yar 11, Voks 1, pe

kpesar Leato, GL Tezeargss29 .
hoticcclity: | TeAN, barn, y sar! 125 jlalais -
Occupations Ld-lvis in Fela ca repmescotalive
— “breses os travftt-oeis, cal of

Yolesreshleue Sule Culesa*® of Doris. .
Leplenszas Uxcoscwa, Lat coutoot of PCOS (/lesos) during ure

you hows a cer,

Pert 11, Vol.U, Fe Hoof ths "Fired BULL Mepert’, of
ver Frits) SEsci

licts a Gurles Beds, bat Unso f9 bo meatica ef Freticis
fo too reg

at, of in Wolds sivly co tho bste golds,

fe Va era with to Ecoitty tha (£3) LUCCHTIT ef the Scvlot Infercaticn
Ortess elt eron QU en) Lexctontin CAGC7 bold mstiggs in bs. Ta
Totesnsiicaal Recosvo (eis) ent outed Camiites for uss Shoo operetes cn
elites, $9 aY Set esest of Comitics wlsa bas eflices cs
13 PoX bvors, ev ak city, a 55 Powtovecd dea Comsioos, Fools, Tho aay?
@roritssticn ia oa censowia cf ta Gone Icternstiersl felief Comilttes ext the &
Balter Casitte. Us tes fecnod ertgisally to beepete reofgoas fa rh

no fusghice iniestécsy

Vepmetcting rofeca wh thout § Reasliny a ry : ‘
‘ Cesestet @ypuicatica, overcl Cosntata t wa ce ’ 4% (eso ;

ny

pomnees

co 9 eusplotes.

tte


--- Page 14 ---
14-0000

ege

Se be eholl be post interested in ay furtuer Inferaction en SNOG

ant his ersoriates you devalep, cc da’ any infermation ox Alex

ecy to chlo to. ovale throwch apfeoyriate ecurces.
which had cot coco to our attention proviously, is attcchet. Orly tho

Fefercree to SINAN has beer treraletod a2 .0 wore unchlo to heve the entire '

docuiont tranzleta! feo prow tronssittal to you.

But ea ksane

attechnas: = 5 Chart onde

CC PresSure
Cf Lerlic
CG barn

C Pruncels

Toul

ILS? you
A cory OF ILO,

Firuzell

by, ann Erérter

Ba, Equi,

vat



--- Page 15 ---
14-0000

,

v

AONE TLea Ra ANeeceeaaeMaoh teat zeaaty janemedanese

EEBTECCTIONS: Cae a0 rep domsnerces Ge “TO viewer tes oot oxrase & ernest oth Os ota hf

erent Teh atice sheald Got and tetrad (cher? mad toedichoeed

Cree “a bee meres ts sheet witer
Tete Rewtag and Beier cree aneuid

horuurnt munerae Or PA-26615. .

Pi WA N Rite RAT

FROM

+f tee titan ot the Leet Ral

panes bee

PIR ARN wm}. r-

ae TLeeer vere Gs §

PATHE

Tie

+149 REPRODUCTI

os:

oceans cle



--- Page 16 ---
14-0000

rg ae MEE a

°. - ~

"OFFICIAL DISPATCH |
vitae. ATL : _ -bioparcn no, GEk 26615 |

wart 28 of cos coven

fait oo

vo °—O~—*«CCkef, TO para, val (557...
5 eo . ad

eaom % Chief of Staticn, Paria - LCPIPIT INFO? Chief, kB

BUaIZCT: cama —Oporaticnal
erccwic =>: DE OUNCE

Forwerded horowith 19 a Foreign Service Daspatch dealing with the
MC'g progrea for Hungarian rofugoca, Your attention io called to tho

-
lest sontonco of tho attachzont to it,

j thet
wad Vex wee

i, Eacleswro: h/u
z 1 =. Feroica Gervice Deapatch (u/att.) .

7 duausry 1957

U
Tigtributtcas
3-10, Vexl,
1-3, v/o cnt, @ we
2- Tipit, w/o enol.

1 = GFA
. : ae
; NOVA IBY-3/17- Wt :
ao: . i
. * . . v. Yor H
os SECREE oe re! °
CLassimaanicn Vv “

HOTTIE LOOSE Oba ev eee tenner eth aed nlaenh cee aie,



--- Page 17 ---
1400080 ‘ way ve es

he etvieaiAtity of dewtics
wy emer’ he hexarien eft

was Sousered oy Saat eoticates uf
- : ,

oy

~
2 fore
Alfeed Puhea ro

retary of Bubasey

+ sane Fp eecety enue



--- Page 18 ---
14-0000

we Be Na Ort ne a tao cree yee Neale Ot ee pe eee trae pre ere

° . . .

. ry
f ” mo . . ' ; fa B =? bos
. . e _ foes i] 2) Age

° a core fouuty
Toa Tio Acdece :

foo be Po Liviexa .

CGcitorns RU mp rts tis eo oft the IntermaNlens} boas Caratecs:
te be. a2 Collowss: . ——- Loe

OL. Cera cal extatenuice ef ent eters ocd oer. escici=s9 to
LA cect (pactectcses47 Chheesclty rethae Cra tis fetonk)
rca ser, Ata LSU ty er ef ths ete
thsz7 tave ecound, wonese tig cy te, Co hoctrica scm}.

] . bso estct to py 10 cttnss pee cry for all of those Ciutama

to nocin In festidag Td CIM exiscvor bs have G9 c? ita
etutecta quss sy for ctatenAlpo cffored ty UIs Cover tios
ext clhem for $u0 cololesciing effort ly tha Pret Geversmmty
go well co acy others ic) acy ba evallealo, fh tho.ccc9 af
ary ciesent 29 ovtrdns o SUL coholersifp, T.0%0 eccicicse
tia vl conclet orieardly of samsaling asclctanca fal 1 saprlos
roatal afd, 4£ rogusuds aa

tol
qos" fa sctel for WO ctuleta da deg estabhiched ant will be
cpsratad rec? Patio br yy Froct Gonch of 1:0.

3. Leto coverina ayeases of a etutat hootel in Werna we Cxtienicd
capacity 300 obuwentoes

i. 1.4 $0 cowering the costa of a bostal fer a reprted 150 crstesta -
"ea WKolfeongeste

$. I. tas parched ‘a Volkmar tea sided starts epcrcting 19 ef
tede7 ncar Antouy thuttiing mfucosa fica tha tonto? to the
eallesilon ttaticn 6 Klicmtorn oxy.

Ge Teo ethl fuscten-500 esmurccsea ils? Hi? £27 tho Ued.
. 209 bose abrety boca covered, Lie eomoutcss ero ned
_itcited to ciuicta cr intellectuals tet Ce Cots wit
povfcr 0 esled tinea psa icsciar 2 posldlss

2 = > wets 629 TG effaced ths Mictetey c? Dhoies to eee
$59 cost ¢F 262) Lalas 43 02 Up os ted ao ott >
pewtsce tn Asstrta co tha dak woo c2tecd ci? ty tho ttinictcz,
Saat the | Linsetsy bos md foot ep lists gercccly
(elthouh f hive peonennlly Gyyestcl ea eccodion £9 sinichy
efbiclile that thoy ciceld nos ict thts epmrtunity dics). tes
Lo e2ill ctinis realy to cover ite comliton,.



--- Page 19 ---
14-00000

en :
to ‘hou ‘York your cucemicn tot

. >
Poll statod that ke oc ag slay,
¢ clothin: ord riraso Looso In com RLU e
vrotably esver ticle an ’

tho -ynmay cover rrovinton of
_ er aver, he antiotinies Ue" reat avatos :f 11
* gasce “ith revand to tush nr ods pf hh does not expoot NG to uternia
the entire ‘burden, te di. state, houcvor, unt the Casittcs ua brincirg
: in tuo of three cure reap. ta arrert the orortion in Vienne In Franca
tiny are losin, trto tis Tre Loreze Lalversdty La 3tmoabo r- tat wuld
mefir not to boo joctatad 11th 4.25 bocace of {te ~overmmant

Corwn:.0°. fonds

Rhee:
RaeTron

sPidvirw. sect

EPR

pain

ACcUURE CARD RE



--- Page 20 ---
14-00000

’

sete & Morning Foot, Saturday, September 2, 1650

REFUOESS KAY BS BSKT 1 0. 8.

———— een
PROFESIONAL 14
By Our Diplozatic Cosresadent

Vaotern Buroposa eatk=Cemmmiot

yloral clasces kay to scat
Valtcd States by haa
caution, Lee Dewt Cantina |.
eis CELA VFL dstor, te ka Wei i.
oa hie way to Farto exd other capitals to investi
gata the pchoie's poouibilitiogs .

Ye do aloo propocsd te eotabliah, probably
dy Leadea erd Pario, Curopesa {natitutes for tha
otuly by refuges exports ce? cvory eapo0t of lite
dn faet Buropa. bir. bartia caid yostorcay?

& thousand
rofu.cos of the profes
for eaployzzat to the

ASavernaticnal Reac

Ms ting has cocs whea tha fires caticas
mist uzo thig caso of lisa tales to record
what is going ca end to oasure there aro groups
evailadld to revive cultur fa Esotara Curopa
vhea tho tics arrivors Wo are proparcd to pring
23,000 Antollectuala to tho Valtod Btates cad
‘could, I think, cbsord 2,000 = 5,000. .

i

mo eee re eeteneny

|



--- Page 21 ---
14-0000

. a
,
te
aS
‘~- oy
ve : . -
SHEET AM a ee te - Fo ee eee

ot . a 7 ~ .
aeboesizie] . : “

1 cin ler #48 comment a ine should be drama across host!
th ne numtar anthe TO owen, Each oll.cer should initial (check mark Inetfclentd
BatoretuctNer rovting Thre Routing an (Ma. ot Short should he returned to Ragivtry ”

panera
ra. Swhe
oS Sdecres, LF,
vy PLASTINVA,
ARAM OTL)

IN qlee mites mio Ans bade BF

we Re beett eka Tagen J 2
Q fear 5 a’

Raat

CONFIDENTIAL URCLASSIFIE.


--- Page 22 ---
j4poo00



--- Page 23 ---
14-0000

ee Cea Ete”

a Pirentet wy oie

we se _—
Wee bette foe ek mite Hay, thn

TOY eh agate seers

ie ie prmtaa ns ngage sean anes

"renee | '

ea

UNITED STATES OF BubDICA

~~ GeERATIONS ‘tanssiot YO GGRi2ANY

Cffica for Ptold Coorticatica |

Escapsa Pregrca,.
c/o dz2fiesa Cosctists Ocasred

Prankfurt/esia, Gercasy

Setvier 18, 954 |

ORD AL

——

Freaiiurt

tsar ke. C3
Is Jena o7 1434 thig offfoe veast794 3 cae frea “PCR for a

conta ty tas ease oF WTA, Porat ttia, the sco tora ia Toplica .
Coschosloveria, ca boreh o1, 1y27. 3353

SSS5: St tag tisa hor sap? v22 ¢u
to thdg offices che tao a utecend fa Graga sesiding cV 5 £vesco Caisa,
e254 Gho.tas betry proovosed fur tuaigration-to Souty. dgoricde

Uaring o routing check oconluotes ca this indtvieual ‘his. offisa
learacd tha} Plczileva tay eocostated with caa Cler ages
exnpeated capiesig2 egent iu Gulteorlesd. Wha tire viv bad EOD
{Sdicate thas Fleszilova vag icglicate! in Killz'a astivat ~
tha otior baad, 1% sag indicated that ca entry vica to F
coiled ty tha Gecaen cuthoritica. I% cas indicated that
Cessva did not havo dixcut coocas to soltoo files ca Plestiova
Cliegs) to bo volecincus. No atteagt sao endo on tho part of ds
persceael to ensiyse tho coco at that tise. Dovover, it cas tha cplaies
of @ coapatcat L-9ricaa uffivor in Sénova that Plesilova sasuld Bad
toca queaticuct in detail about ‘hor taceground and activities tor tbo

F533 ovvea years.
T3EP

ate la Geneve
sigrates Lo
f & Revowws

Esocd on tre atove infgrantion, Plaaticva can genie
aligibility. Cm sucugt 24 T wrote te se Aserican f=

edvioing thea trat Plusiiovu nod left Soitseriant and t
Hus trangportetsen vas covered

z

zy i fode

sturn.tluna)] agague Tussittea tecaase TIL? olies-
ndvisod t%6 Tonuulaty %3,:

Loxico on Saly =,
Fund Loun feu ty.
bility had teen sented. I
that thio anf: Of BhOW be bresynt tu the att
Ascricun outhorstivs in Genuvu, in uilovats :

might not te in the boot anturents of the United Stateoa.

at at waa ‘sy cyinica
ticn of proper
nc@_ in exise

. : eywt : ‘ .
eve, (3 taal

CONFIDENTIAL

.

ees ERD

° _ f Q--. FOO tHe.

at «

PPHODURTIPRS

2

2D HEPRODURE



--- Page 24 ---
14-0000

. . ‘og ae ee

+ thomas cememstiogt” selene Rec IE

eg ee os
a ° e . . &si- a .
’ e . Dh .
, CONGR
<= sae - S ,

Ca Yototer 1, 1954, I receivet a letter frca tho Conrulate fin CcxzTds
Cris loster stated that "If you would indieste tho particular autiosiiict
bere to whoa the foot that thio wossa has prosecdad to Eexioo gigst bo sf
interest, z ehall be glad to ecnzunioate with thon.*

"hia ofZ100 doce not fool that vo chould toll the Consulate ts
Gcaeva which Aserioan officore vould be interested in the typs of informe
Rica 00% forth above. It io falt shat you bight wioh to tranosit thio
inforoationa.

.

Miser youre,

ah ae nnn
Screening Office:

CONFIDENTIAL ey xd

Sot EE ee Tee tie tare ane ee me



--- Page 25 ---
14-0000

cond with tha humbze la, i 2 r wot ..
nd ecard Sheot shoul s o : ao z 4

‘STIONS

0 GePROREST

af

3
: :
1S ’
FEV 51-10 Ssaa



--- Page 26 ---
14-0000 -—

‘ecatained tn Ratereaca A, 6 eccsriced
Aticlitics of sity-1 vea ferese ta Esferctes 1. Tia
> record £) crvatce catadl the inform Sica dorwardad in Beier
<crh ths latest cevalop=nte ecncoraing Identity le . aan

o

asta follewing tho 17-0 2953 dexcaatrations, a group ef Ess} Cc:
“Yerasisleds theosalves ¢3 ugirike les. ra%, ese reported 2 ferciag |
ca esveral ecustes, it us2 Coterct ed thss (he omtp Rea reccdvin3:- 2
y3 corel cupporty Esato ond 29 frea geod peresza OO Loa
Y. Eootresa ent ctiarg who alte diy elehcd to excato orcs
4 srlia sestoteata-iy7s Geass. 1b ¥39 prevterdy bea taasV :
iso ves Vory-egbive for owes Gis Coats chtespting to eshevlésd o exttsal Sli2 fcr’:
inferassica Coaccmiing Ea9% Garcany to Ehich all Corlin crgralesticns tet te; Lo, +
Shin to ctals iafornatics. wlioly, hia ressca for this 69 to einpiic7 costs. mon,
instica cstivitios coca th Borla Geoura, but it. is Ina thed hia mol ress
- to estatlichia perccoal eossuny ef cata over ell o.
big efrorts hed tec wesucs Ra cna, to, xing othir foclcso, Aho cosine:
. ichs “cciricr? ergenicatica.. Th continuing efferta upca tho poss of Lote,
Excci ty Evgata ths poaition he tod prior to his dicaics:

f
%
é
t

of recon. ;
, 3, Is eppsarcd that tho crentica of Iccnvity 1 e3 a copsrate catity weld cot el)
tt eral Ycold var? (reas, end forth thd -

engiting. cf ecacis

£29 ecisicrce We ca of tha porcois neatiearca

coxphicatcd weat Csriin ccend. sna EOD pocisica two, ¢

k, M29 sely 1953, pier to the initial esoting of Identity i, CAT2I7 tozitcl

tho Sour Lestezva? t> viois the CLlci? caterticioms to bo triefed o2 aa coma
, gardiea “Of coiytca out ity Esss tata visit, a cost?
. ef tho Seirike lecdero? dLocovered Sst tis CALOT? Esot Germs progyea moceys.

pistritsstaa:

cpa
SECA
CUSSION



--- Page 27 ---
14-09000

ga ee

we eR nen ee nd ES ees in NA eek a eta deed Mamet Stna ommees etabiietee
., . . .

oot +25 . seh a deo’
foe i ra : ;

ate edty ths foomatti

seissiretio ¢s7.
Pointe wateat od thas thay
AZ cremsisations rather Van to te new excep.
prt os the CALESI? sooting fe [:rwaried wuer perasate -

eu cf tho points ATCA were. hips

and eines this wuld constitute 1
epyrogizately. ten of the 3
Bupzert to CALI? of
(Tre Verma ler gisgs
cover es attechscont "4°

$...0n 71 July 1953, © spectal maeting of variove west Berlin auveresent axt reslen
tance grcud reproasntat woo calles to ciecies the fossibility any Cesirazlisty
of encouraging t! tion of Identity 1, with few exceptions, ail cf tas aajor
Chganisations oxpresocd the view outlincd in paragraph J at.ve. She erggsstlos
wag offictally voiced that tha acztera cf Identity 1 shuld lend their eccpcrt to
-exlating organivationo, (A Geraan language report of thi weotirg powparad by tre
CaGROIT repreacntative is fcrwanied under esparate cover as Attact=mt °5?)

' 6... On 12 auguot 1953, 9 meoting wos called by HICOG-EAD of repreccatatives ‘sf 13.
intalltgenco orgsaisations in Berlin. Tho purpose of thio nesting wea to diecuca
the posoibllity that the formation of Iieatity 1 misht conatituto o throat to the
-eecurdty of anarican forces in-Rerlin. HICGG hed aleo received a7 erroneous roe
pert that DILINGN ord CAUROIT were rendsring Identity 1 finanefal exppert. fh
latter ispreacicn waa corrected during the mooting, and tt was determinad thet
Identity 1 would probably not ccnotituts a threat if it did not receive or doralep
finaacial backing. At the tine of these discussione, it did not arpoar Mivaly ©
that Identity 1 would recotve ouch eupport, and {to asaote woald frotadly te ad-
forded in other Woot. Dorlin. or West Gercan orrenicaticns. There were imitcatlons
that eeveral of tho “otriké leaders," with the eid of ZACOUIFY, were gaining om
ploynent ‘in the Féderal Republic. .

~ 7.» The only direct contact established by BOB with any of the ratrike leaders*
wao with Identity 2, who was considered for exployaat with DILINat. . The nature of
this ecntact eo essentially covered in the following correapendence: | SSiLy GXQ,
D2 18141 ord WP-A 6120. Identity 2 was not hired by DTLINiN. : :

8 . &i 17 October 1953, the Chaircsn of Identity 1, Idchtity 3, inforacd Neleoa Q.
Eonard thet he (Iuentity 5) intended to resign {roa Identity 1 eince ho was receive
ing inowllicienat cupport to cake o living. Ho cated thot elthous ha waa recolve
Bs ects curzort froa Iucntity 4, it waa not enough to raintain Lia orgenicatica

3s basta. Ticntity 3 cabal that he had e:ia poeliaee reldo eppearence3,
da tesa recolving tp to Gia hand vice
Fa paported that. he hed attesztcd to goin ft neiel eupport frca to
Ministry for £2) Geraca sfrotrs end other crpantestiona, bat head be:
uncuceescfuk. ha thea sucgcotst to Hsnaill that Ideatity 2 end CLOUT cost extsde
ltch a covert weruing eg ne with tho latter ergsnicatica Curmiching tha funda.
fna effer hod cng ettrasiiv: 7505, ly, that CLOLTI? csuld, through tho ccssta
cadesco cf Iecatity 1, toveces ita pecccas ctzalea el open a ah other ficlus of

poyenelecies}
oN tra i.

that Calm. dnt Gizsmeo tha ¢

titted to Henanl ¢hs3 thane wire wiccairctls cleats “ends tear ety. jl who would

bara to ta resovel tafors & the erganisaiian coula fanctica effectively.

0 il nn tic dean IN ec tei Alte Eheee aye Tt uae mn UD tnseiee nies eee ne



--- Page 28 ---
14-0000 ,

“offices. Identity 5 etatea that efforts wore nado

_cenonétraticna, it waz natural thas Yuentity! 1 would cet a cic
. tica with thas croup.
vidual, peaventcd the cate

 (aadeca ene:

“faeently, Eoodsosa pocdiciod a etucy ef tho erate c2 27

- CaO). Bosireay, giving credit to Identity

are : a:

ath dn-Roference A that a's
dfocusaicas hat Yo otat
‘of tha ec€ivitica 2!

ond

. Tdentity 7, en cant cermanrefugce who wos an active 1
th tho SFU. Oatburo, ¥ao ‘designat
cosmenced \work. immeulately, but it: aocn.
cooporate with olthar CADCNA or “ZRCCOIFT

ULT office. Ho.

ther then
co ty Moot Gorcon ed Selgten rep-
‘fosentatives of TFOCCULT to bring, tity 7 into-closor harmcny with CACcA, bat
thedo'wore fruitlcos. Iuentity. 7. kop! ‘Kncwledg2 of his activitica {rea c.ccvrry
‘masberd, and it also bocane apparent that ho waa not informing T°CSCULT of every~
ttilng ofther. ‘Tha latter has evidenced a growing dictrust and dalalik
7 which hao’ alsdat epproached tha stuta of comploto disassociatica. » (Fer racent,
ing ito, om Borlin.offico, 600 EID-A 11223 waich doa-

sevidenew of TFOCCULT by-passing

‘eridaa o TFOCCULT overture to DILINN.) - : :
LL. Sidca tho TRCCCULT Corlin ‘effica ws2 wore or lesa on Outerceen of the 17 June
steaph waa code, but eppereatly Tceatity 7, c2 en indie
“at of en effective woriing rolaticasnip. Ca tia
OCCULT offine * the les: hip ef Idcatity
a’ ia the Porlin end ess cosmo. Low,
43 ticy thet Loutreaa begun coking overturca

wether head, CAvGM looked
Jes cn tnevcsalngly wiica:

Juontity b, 46 wsa cosas. t
stedly ecting ca ea “uaodrictal? forroscatetive of Wentity 1.
cathy hoz cenak YGscatity.2 co oa activity to effess
hity 4 sca fuuncling echo
J su. Ie 7
th cpast:a highly of Loudreca, &2 obsorvatica waich haa tera reported ty Jor He

gualitaaca also.

tha, C ule

23 becca quite

ae $ y 5 peportcd Lertt rah Eovdresa k
oniinsicd vita Tic)

eity fcr Yccadity 1. 13
erazica cf ca articlo ¢:

75 foe Use &

atity 2 iz csupisicly o re 7
bo coda vita cithor TPOCCULT eo? Duclos? Tdootity $ inv
miaery to G1 Lacrics) To atativa o2 tha 261, & Mera ¥o9 £9 be
tha exsent of dntarss tha latter crgsatzstica cies] fo the etfetrp 7
aa (rp cao ¢ fe
for this ventare da ciao, tat Imiltz 5 Gapgtatel thas ez toy bere emer fro

T top the cotertal ta tos reais

d.

oo worning ecsoclas ©

abor Iceder and had work-

o-for’ Identity |

tince

eity.5 £9 evaro tate

_



--- Page 29 ---
1400000,

. 16. sines it cppeara that Identity 1, although roportedly uot very aitive,: haa

‘4 copies of tka
thea Netty,

a Identity Swca eware
ty i ‘for furthor dlotributs
of Pp 9 eho hed been arroated or tating part in. tho 17 wana, detcnatraticaa, —" <
‘to hid knowledge, howsver, no finda | aa such, were over given Tdentity ‘l fra thie

14. Nolecn Gc. Yenara recently rojortud that. Identity 3 hoa revlgncd trea hig poate
ticn Ly Identity 1 end io now proct! ‘Lovin Boater verminy. Feaant also stated

_ that cha haa hesil of no recent activity upen the part of Identity 1 and has heard of
Jno ‘Foplaccsent being nuzcd to fall the post vacated by Identity 9.

15. Tho mecSerun!; p liat of Tuentity’ i a3 rororted in Dus-207 agrees in pork width
a lict forverded by Heaants - For conparicon purposes, thy lattor Rist -La forwanied
under sagarats cover £9 Attachnont LL :

bod redolving o e211 crount of financial cupport froa CADAIA, Lt da pocoiblo that
a ccatinucd dnvestigaticn” ‘of £tdsectivitica cay by verranted.. If c0,- 4c do oye.

ceated that futura queries be diruated to Jota P. Quintance, the Bu,UART Casa Offic
ce? who hs9 airoct contact with Cav0a. Sinco‘tho attashacnts are fomards! in ~
oinclo copica, it 19 rujuvotcd that
“poruaal.

y bo forvarucd to the Hose’ crfico following

. , : Watt 4. LiswcemD

Meliviu L. LARSON

ye wetnioa .

<0 pésvusry isle

Blotrdbutica: 7

3 - CricY, [3 (atta: Geoffrey b. Magecn) w/ott. 'E G3)
3-= C&t{Atin: Ualleco H. Parlett) Wart 4 thru D (1 0a); wfart. 8.43)
2 = BO2/U7TLS u/o att, . .
abteshtconte: UNIGPECY ae
A thru D deseribed above L %
B= Idontity shoot - +



--- Page 30 ---
14-00000

ceapeerccrargeseecers voce em ag

ae

eepintenpes tien eae abate bide eccs Pe ret mmed tel Peers aviator

nn ian Reset, aenaetnaeed .
ren ye : Vs oy
" “ eo ve : . . eee
. Cn .
. ome
. . A é
: a astaczant 5 under poparate cover to £63-A-12.002, : : _
a ype : .

Identity 1 do stne}Gamaittes for 17 Juno*
entity 2 ts Wortree Gove
Tueatity 3 40 Karlholris J oahier

_Heatity ie “Tatemattonal Rescue Comittee

Tontity § 40 verbort “faker, Labor officer, PICO, Rorlin
ae “Tuentity & i walter 2 Reuthor :

Testity Tis s"cnilling (fe)

auentity 8 4a Norbort Hublen _ ;

be leta fiom

lantity 9 As = Tea ee ost pee (ean Mean

|
{
1
1
A
; }
‘
_ pistribatient ; . a
.. 3 + Chics, Ls (atten: Geoffroy be Kagoon)
3- Cal (Attar wallaco 2B. Portott) _
2 - RRL . vee . oH!
ate lrspes D 2680 aeons
,

at ws ut “230- snd-te make -

ee eee TE ne al stl ge A saci eva coe tee

aati tere re bes meee toe



--- Page 31 ---
14-0000

Lea
.tetion, tarts
awoe o rwermant btw agent
—
i Spo Rerticier “wriasp Als dated 3h Ustacr Liv)

1. Vw fsbew of Uda-af tee swveal tie Foalos Sabon concer
ing ‘to subjects

(a) Tha uae ol

WA

mn: ) Cctar rULTY viata tal Ue

Fhaiia over wu portal oF EF,

ip fesccu in ta peried ifs any

“Carrespondont: for Ga egutinds Wi Fetter, a very ProSordsc.

peried Le tock (a te ba NEG Ue. where fhe Expt tusa fer .
. alssat 2 years ail Ct oo Qecke Coven se eat Zochie, Tatu reycrt farther

olatad Wat in iy aiysr to ee ho A roterncd free loscoy havizrg. broxwm

wit: too kusalesa, Loy cow 3 FLED panes) often, Gd wy reund tat Us -
> YDS wore aloo beside: uit: Ui.) Covlots ef Ia? to hLsLts cere”

“etdll frieniy with byte ef tis WSCIGLS end 62¥ tic Pra try to tm,

() tn @ sxyort datcd § aay ww pevtewig: nia catavities ta Euecta com
ing tra Issue ow LNs, ib we bad tat FIG wa voll bonn to hava
eqjoyed umizcally clos conhct ui: Yoviot officials particu
Sovtot Foreign Uffico., ba sauticcy bed Ginect coatet vd Rac
jovict Popol: Affairs Caries, ail 3 9 uted to
V plge-Line to te breccia tov. DN Uw cutete wohl
MATZ. RACYS and moos ef Flicindty cll-plecsd contacts were Liquids
to Oxia: Vorpe of L9gi-33, eat ol) tol tributed, ‘po dnt, to Ff,
tant dioencenticot Vth 9 Sovist Logics. in ey cvedt, be
wed ulin eabbametyd Ww. pet big e -
bed dual U.d,sovtet citieonc>, wt ef La
Z re iikn Laving ebtainad tho exit eles Land pov pecccnal
Lstersecsion th fet dopessetor SLM in Wachts fur Us Soviet
esthorities were wll au vy Los thw of TRA eteatiestica, Thin

.
hy
it
Ho
aie
YL

aL Tage Ti Cat rine GENCE

Tata he 02. €.



--- Page 32 ---
14-0000

Pa

Best

’
2.
;
2
2
?

exy.
. of Vervend Uiiveraty, ca La cooxd to tiy te confides:

vot

report atso otated thas Plvuiis wea tative Caring tis vpanles Civil war in
capers of the Icjaliota cui wear . , 00d conteww wlth the
Ys53 Bogudltess Fring hintotir, has, who v3 ge wrally Pocards

Sovlot etocse. 89 Tegardes! in Ussesw 29 3
SSwotsigict.? that FICCI hed ben very
estiva t in eyporling (9 Tetica etteiltss couse cil to on very pood tere
ehth Coe. £9 Coe enna Ciro be bod become wary critical of tho si
Coomtists cicasolty, Loring Wb6L2 ed USL) ha dheplayed eaxa Aatcrest in
tha Bescies ome. tu Goreany, Wisse who tsra fenur Covist olitcens, end
cclisheratcd ulti Loris a. Lt5d ia pooticiing O bork tn the U.S. entitled
uiich £3 a cespitaticn cf tha mypatsd Milo oturica of core

alia eol(scs, wally trea ti Viess) rovensnt.

Th thule regort To
who woo bora in Lotvls,
Usckecsha Finch, b3 ca Uno o39 t23a a ecerotiry cf CH
Eavist Feretoa Lfietya Commas Loin %
veriing fer CLR
a> ti} bea
bitsy

Ficiey,

wary Olecnly prosovist ia
past ee) hor paced & BiaGavtos nalees = ert erd

3 fS2 vas Teoarted. to Law mr Gormry
is Wee) Seary Unre 9 uso eyycsnl to have wrksd cna
bork cold & bo o tesa of flotica, bts cooctont 6

FLOW ens curmoudly liv ato fora wiich eh cin ot Eatles'y Cuns
Fa, coor Gasertean, Fas, but tat pho wy escuiry exployecnt cpain in oc

eidlry bre. , \
@ngther coutica ef thts repost vos domtcd to semepa by FINCUM, esa ek
Lowds et Meiicecia PILGL, tho t3 ecooticca kien ty Co LoS dtatsilvo,

Ka era educated in both Gesniny end esecy end coca ta to U8. 0d 1
ba cca groctuated fren tho University ef Ulse

fa ite Feses Intollicenca Corin; Ua utr, bo
x22 uscd Ga etostas di loa ehiro bto bouletss ef Cosrten proved sory exe
fel. Tags reperd oiated Cia; Polat var Coommo Ficliut tia cd Eosvard
fer esveral yecsu cau Lovell fetocchty end bod boo coriiry ca bta testy
fer Lis cxtcsatu, ba boa ecco
ey cf ti Vicsov Kavercas, bla catyud balny probably tho tcut caterted exotie
alo, To eotaln noterlal for erttc fppcexing tae mates Cf beooicsa eae
Cissd, be rico Cofirval trips to Lin 2S ema onl etic 12 ecntars ta Gur
Bly erat rescad eee Bers Ga bahay of tha Cessten Boson Cem
of Profersev
in torts, 195 ba vce travels
be ia en officer of tha bbe

ta,

yess of ga wits hla mottor,
contin, Scaving co a cats

AEPGWICH cnt False & .» Liutky ts Con
Ling on erdsry fru ti fay Fores litarizcacea.

sete Witt: ca the wicca ed Rist |



--- Page 33 ---
14-0000

Somat © erm ome poy -

' fvea Cnotisr trip to Germany there ha centusted + mo ior tha Hervard

Yores Esserva. Uhtu ro.crt furthes atatad tat t Lee he pelumad . . : { .
t
(
’

i ef 1550 to S eteey tig keazesca eerste 95869 3 informed botecaes MoD raney ; ,
2 wea hia rotuni la waa vitiuiresing Mra furthor weru for the Eorvord Rusclea - : 1

Eostarey’ Coates in ertor te concentrate ea hte thealu. Cocrie FL Rto prin

etgal ecatsst ta Gereazy tea Costs LEOVLV, Ess of ta Viecovits crap, © . t
Sodus Esskcy xa Covetecidcrta Larccsz Eorill (stent Untea fer Lthorsttes :

ef Perpica cf Posala), ta OAM, Ca corbter tolea bo hed beca tn touch celta © .
PeiMp Licuseaisv, cio? cf Coulsity cocurity ecetica, bub cinco L-TC3TLV

“29 reported te bo cuifering fea conses end thonere not ective, FIOCIL Ita
Istes centostg wid kt QOsomya FIL fo repested ta have
tedbra vit Col. ruuy. R wath besenron which PUUUTAKO? vc2
cing for Larvent, but PLE

(0) Tes Us in cr investigative report cn Copol Dury CRAIDT dated 4 demmy
W52 ctated Cish ea inycrecne cf am Ris-wseren casised that in Cosets>
end Descober gl) end so La J. WSL Lote Pid, vio tusa resiécd ed
Eotel Dusno, a5t tecteca Leama, tea Youu City, si ta coatzat ulth Caso] LELL,
Uteresy cucat, & & bia Gtaest, Kev te. eye MS report qrotcda
vie of FECL book roi attcy ta te 12 toy Ey 1 22 ef 9 ena
cies. Sista revicu tate See YS oars Lowta FILS eas the fours!
Codersto feca boy Yosu?a Lteccal toy to t:9 Eescica Povelaiic. E13 tive
vols fF pm Fords y en Ver feet baer PIII oo catterity oa Cascio
pede ae a Wire Bee 239 contest v1in Puscicn potdctotens,®
Voz to tiie revises, Muda dlc. SS of trate (leva) ecoveqgestent tu
OW cojcothys czd full of hostility to busaias PLALOMNY gepesta vay
3 ees a Cel be bees bo vesite Basoisn a.tiop of
Shania re ese otatcl tiat en to-
forssat of tena re siscstatey civics ea Ll duly 16a) that Fle], o elle
bem Cemats) Witos, v3 leaving des Doclend cod tiat enoticy infesncat of
kev reltcolilty edviesd Cat tn 1937 PICCHU eco ertiva ulti tro Kegoltst
fesesa in bgct. La ectpttes en invest of uncoova rolsehilatz edvic bry An
sorry de GML tn hi Sy U5) Case lo hed no positive infomutica bus bee
Moved that FINIL] wo weltdiy for to :

acy Waa oa interes
cf tia Covtas

(6) Yn es FUL report ca Colen.
of mown reléctitity ototed t.
Intollicessa [vate er ia in 3 Uae Oy

at tit ins tho yrowlaumatos wad wae dy ewe” 1 wid Post

SreMaycege
% pleas

ne :
vi
ae

PD WER



--- Page 34 ---
14-0000

(0) 4 620 report ca Pret, tate J ht3 wlfa cated 27 Ascust 1990 dine
Cint:4 o lise of | Lonel Oe @ OS sotly C3 sicst ver thd CuDicata.
iia c3 cf crf: 219 VF, » O97 Mcddoca kvera, Row Yous City 16, telephony :
aie 105495 sasted eaves tincs end 29 data SB soser Ib} ronthensds
ibe osm ef FICC, Oise eypcsrer tyra bat bested Stattcra7.
(2) In oe Sotsat frea a towsliy reltevle coerce date 427 Cootexber 1951,

» ca éncytesn cititca tera ia Faiieasto: L) Februsty 135, wa

ats ¢3 eiyicg ad to Ketel ecuitssa ta Eos) | 33 fprhdl to 23 fart
doze Lg vr3 cocopanted by hia eticsod clo, Torta vio tera ta Lstvla ca

@ comery 170, Ly uaa fn posse posszert Lo. rae “33 dated L Enotes
5 ext kta tlfo, Ko 199 O3cd 13 Felay 1003, bois tcoeed ia Vocitngtom

Lizta reo regartcd 23 dopcsitcg fer Plerensa ca 7 Apr if51 wnera 4% esomed
e293 23 Scinsd by bin, Locorchy.te pxrecoucl of tha hotel, FICuiwoa. |
boost. eltined to ba o jeusntiot, but theca vero coma Coto c3 to
tite Geta, Wien leaving Kccioy bo Left Lita tracy ules Lote) perecocct, ond it
wr. dater picked uw by on Unlecniificd friend, Ib bors Plt bot coatesta
BMS fellcudosrtccnd. tha purpecs oF lita trip to Italy vis unica

(2) A repert cated 29 Gcpuectcr 195] ctatcd thot ons GLAZLUSZ end clfo, ond
GV25] end ulfe epent ta holicay cf Footer, 1952, ob Voords cia (near Uspisa)
together cits tio “totlelnown calisiteltctet novupoperaza, Louis PioGi}.9
tis reper clco clatcd Git GUE bid Gominlot efiiliaticon tus that
enna ‘Gove fio indicatien of olny cucuy of this.

(2) Ina report cated £2 DeccNer 15h) Leuto FISIER usa tncletsd eg
Coleentss to a coaferonsa of (hs Tnicreaileaad Lebar Ge cstica to bo bald
Y Fotmeneed 1609 da lyjecso, Incite, t9 report elca ota tat 4¢ 123 pee

” Gmsd tat PICA woo trea Fsenca bus tase tte ena not Cofinitely imam. |

(3) In o dscuncad dated 13 Vemary 1951, Lovta PISCHA2 esa reported to hava
oi09 ceatribaticas to tha G00U., a political evpanicatica cepesed cf tho
Qciivict reoccia of tho ecortins Wesco covencal, Gut exrrica cn both
cocrt end clawtcsiles estivitics etcd ot tha cventsal overiiccy cf C9 Covet:
Citiateschty, tha aftivitica of tis crgacicatiea hava boon fiesrecd mcioly by
cca, contrlvutions, ond dnityostly by Korvend Wulvercity tarewca ths Institute
for tho Otay of tio Sovlot Union which iy oteffcd maolly by Soul pereenncl,

2. Taore is clso a reforo... ~ voto FISCHLY in c¥Fh-8195 cated 230 ey

3. fa vegicsting informatica ecase 3 Sjost, kii4@97Us issited our
ectentt 3 to the tolleving voferenccos pel’ 595 datcd 14 Decexter 1950
é $59, Col, C. Sync y emorent ofS Jamory
si. R fio tio pinion co? Lésbacs 4. Renan, euthes of W7TA-6:55, that
Lect FIC dsscribed in those referencca is not identical wits Leute
VIALS cited in tha EATS cynthoais,

e- mo,


--- Page 35 ---
14-0000

ie eaeeeemes ray tn tener

baknst tReet Orenery

‘he Us Rove ro tofoomatics cccocring to prescat wisreses end of
estivhtica of exdisaty Letras WW bove peocesicd Ube iafermaticn fro tho

A GAC eieiia joa Wea esate CE ryerts
. 5. De tetematicn caatitand fa thts data Lid £9 pot to bo cistritsted

extctés your cSfico in fey bowrty Soa gos cy Clee CCR o trist etic
1 ey PES esac racy t22) Lin that © chal) fanaa

car penne tat tena aeeettt

ri Eyyrae |.

ote:

Cia- Faye.
Zt Ferqusy NG,
fabs Bho
Faas g Shih

ake Cae omy
Greas gente.



--- Page 36 ---
14-0000

. ‘
er : Ly G .
’ qiareotere eeatral Invelllianca 3 dower BS m,

“ASO Oran Liiwetar for taratloanw

& gocnd veo cera In ny office a harelay,

: -2° intisg ous varie 'a0 wd Sag Wcroby
.. Oo ged ee ne each te of eaiad benefit to casi. oiner, ila
. Fracocas were thats

(a) bw Mined iary valusule tncattt ese ccs in
: . butopd nat C2325 bo enculs be esl? bo co overce=s .
G pereamiel ta cider to pars b.ca infora.tieg aus recelvo .
> y tale ahd ia ct 5 Ua courses te Uils sy t
rolled ob ia; 1 ole tut tha tus fork 2

biol) vifice, with hza alrealy bem in copuct,
would lo clad to formu) oy dacalera of caviidates for
edatsogicn wor ieotion Jo” uvlte ooo LO te -a5..fo.tm
for conslGcras cle

(Bb) var datecode wid t&
ay Ula aso af Gamo ei fia quest
yg taesyte, Lruplicd tut i rolt tia

{ dimctly git Gw vecurtbual of potas ca bios

(0) G:A oxculd (9 to Ceyress out press sor Qsence
remig to the acGarrea bet bi order to fur
joteatic) 3 woll é: conist ig a aude
Dropltal ums ots woo a policy minis far
to calva, vat oly in qi cifors t2 coinista ancy:

s TOO ratel pulite aiz,ulis lot
pes lb.ca Lf calles @ cy
conpeole at comsbitecy 2 C2 bo

en
ot

eee ae

«d) Ci. tesa ay uli ols in Ger zy fis Lascsest aay!
fa ths eerecuny efivte, 2 reulted tas tis es om &

4 Vor

26. Subs 2 ocusa tls wl

penny
PAs

1 et remem reg cemmemapaen wnt nn 4:

us FY hes

Pore pertins er ear


--- Page 37 ---
1400000

. ts Ow be canga.a cace.sn Peolactng sda, \ichard dyrd.

“guen a ojecs at fess 2.13 10tles mtn:

ody isteal wotsens utyolved ap.
lias 8 te of sated ha’ var, Was ant hat ot . i
Avenire aa wt sectlas ree ls oO 85 PPR Ce | '

te sai 2s Cmunter ure fupad Lor Lie (PON ete

So tlue a tas s cessoful bi Lidia are iortin oloo~-
is eftoris be pata oujport set. lo cos.ul. tra bo”
2 Carl Tpacts wee reins bo fo lt

3B) a

ea
Ant /ose . i.
con Ai/di a
Aiftea- :
Contact Ulvleion
“

i
™ os . . . ; |
HAL ; 7

0 : :
u y ‘ 7 “ at
ve F sleet ,¢ |
pee rede i
1 . » . -
ov “
« 4 ‘
° . ‘|
: oa



--- Page 38 ---
14-0000

ad vwirector, Cautral in.ollh waco v Y 3 dovesce we: :

Asoleian, Listoww for Lpratt

ww othe Could be of qutual bun fit ta cat. olaare
AALS tory thats :

ce es ey Ee re | ae oY

(ea) ee finds coy valualle incollt enca sources in)
rarere nnd baat he osouls be ble to coptsss C.. oecrsees:
eauitl in crdsr to jets b.ca liforcasica G.a rescivo
7 dn ,otting tho ccourees to thi wee ft
replied thas tris wos invousi Le bat bial clita bua Tore t-
YloldS vifheo, with w ich La has alreswy tem in caatacty
wed bo inl to for 1eny desolera of caxcidatcs for
Ginis3.en unter :eution. 2 of uslle Gor LS te -sa toi”
for conpidcras:ads vo

fb) UdA daterceds with tio Lovartaans of .riasse for
> Lites 390 of como Of 163 Quota for qiivadce ca isto ond
J roplicd tass i selt thay bo a.ccbs deat

ty j Gerestly with the Gorurbunt ef iwreise a Gls.
4 : .
toch. a (cy G:4 oiou2d 9 bo Ceartesa ead procs ior nine
. 4 ments 9 tie aileron dct in ardor to fur its intelll .age
a & ete3tl2) es woll o esotst tn a4 difvsiion wy. amte
Ho en f£ ruglicd tut ly toa u policy mattis for tak .courbaat
§ SN to colve, bias cLA in ar cffors to caintala auaycity ta
bok Beect2 &2 Lettin: dose ecatrev.ralal puvite o.a,uico Lut
tof wold exiulicdly or {3 positica tf calloy cacy
| :

(oj CLA contrilat to the suppers ef a po sca
aaied institut (9 raricy Gemny, douria EN
wsid3 prevics cyloymsad sor displscsa cs:
W3, Cle, CAI resuls i a eva cf &.
ends Tre tied tits CLA Lod no Dino fe2



--- Page 39 ---
14-0000

Y RAS Lg

a ‘ ‘ , oye eee
. . “ge : . ? . ~
‘ mee . .
:
Buh a poseck ant cocuct a 186.88 Fi .teLles Bete : .
ihe veg tnt os Woe colavical solic Lovelysd as” ’ °
Belk ad BL;y.oTte eatod ho but fone thie and hal ot
aohore and wat alellai pew bas bi urging to) 8: rrace | .
Fag edb ug countersrt Supaa Lor ws ,Tojects a
2o Lt Mov: i eas. ef cousoful to viding wre 2 -Ftin alooe
mere L. iis efforts’ toala edjjort mt Ll ip xoa.0l: tar be , ’
Fay Oo, reach you ewuugh Un, Curl i paste wiv be ese bo te ld .
Mic hw fu comga..n enauran replacing Ada, Richard Uyrds
‘ é
a H
i
tet 7a
!
. 7 ~ 1
:
iuCfoja i
Cos. 0/06

ADS.) ~*
Contact Divinion



--- Page 40 ---
14-0000

. .
.
ro 8
fee . . - ‘
. het ve ema | tee ores wae oe
a Plo yg
‘e} ROP -

et
oo a e oo :
af oe wr SECRET F
~ * ROUTING ANG RECORD LREET 3 Yuna 1S)

Abe vied nm the "TO" etume Under e cheommet ”

- NL
STEESTISSE: Cotas cong one vim!

. Mighacy sharon the TO" bo'una Lach ofhice lene orien men on

ot

Ad ELD Komen aun eres to ce Sof Y
betere tunker meubng TRS Aaa ng ent Boe She rateined to Reptey i :
EGAN

x Le

Seyern
aki. t of
we Pe
coe

4 \Ga

hi —-lyesc

fein ae

pam OWARISS$ + en

a

af

Fi]
od Ucrioys


--- Page 41 ---
14-0000

~ TSEC

cMatsr xancs

“tel fa)

FROM Cetef of Meise. cs, Yranturt
SUINCT: erm DSU ADP ART
err As etstarca te Soviet Escasres Through USEP

a

Rr BXUHS72 sores

1, in a recent comvorgaticn with Ur, nicra
Freckgeurt, he my Vvoral portions of a-listter uhich ho hod juat
recoived frat nis Washington hocdquartors dircvcting sexo feirly
strong citicica to the Gensan country unit in fra hemilin: of tho
Neadleass te cay’, Yroan was ccnaidorculy tpses cinco it
t . : ~ Ievas hig
Anpregaicn that “6ar convoreations oF Last Neventar and Dacencar end
tie remodlal actien tue by 7G at that ting relative to tho US?
Gorman unit'a hardline the Soviet progren hal indicated his willings
raz9 toe do enything posulbla te correct dofictenctos and to foros
etal) just ouch criticisn. In paregraph 1 of the referenco vo indle
catad that gatinfactory enuvers to cer questions had beon received.

In this connection we unclesy og Attacarent A a copy of Srown's
written enswore to our svectf{le questions. (4ttachnent B io a criteria
for USEP assistance.) . .

2. In read to the erltisedum levelied at Prom end the Gorman
uit by tho Smmrurta Keto office, tha following vertinont excozpts
vere passed to the weleraleneds +

. . UAL the third metiog a great daal of ctrosa wes cid ca
. the question of spacial intorest casnaa of oth
egenrtva. I was able to diol) at son lengt:
hanlUine thas wa have yiven spoctal intercat
cite chepter end vers» of our resort to ti
§t was folt tw shovld vary givatly int
tn Lhis taspect. It 13 cloarly ccnatéared
portal wintorvat caus oa a vary nich pr:

ersdéa, et to
C2. VNenotiotes3y.
effcrts

REPRODUCTION

et

nredant py osed: 233 O50 Doing Terorented | hy tna Progeaa, In

1 epacifdcaloy, it waa felt the’ tho Frogren hea bes

to Associate ftaol” or ita ceotractors with exses whics
padcan’ inazgerable difficulties in connzotion wits tho oa

aaNet,
mane

$


--- Page 42 ---
14-0000

find athe om
{te opr ol flees, of orrancine
wre Dae boat that the
effart Shoe
fanort: Mm

yatee
cther contrre &
Poon] on a tor ; .
‘etter vanced to gue,
logan, sed Sorte
sonasg mn
Te orief, Ce Sous trae
punch ta thy ir ree and pres .

tens

Me bbe ogee

Srereet the} um ho:

tye of caste.
re neon Aretastte ing

tLe tne
OU, The

Departnent mart to 8
the Geran countrt et:
bar an

on ‘fee srounts of vel etary
never Wittig The
tin Sovdete, only diplacats
pranted liste?!

‘Pg are cangensd by Brown.
nade above melatdnn. Lo

eer oar Lawese
p

ast Samar
paue ard ‘

earnest te
3 ic ne Loner neressar
Sualbys eg

Howevur, we ao angi
that enc: case i

fTat

aha ne

n feels that or
mont tit aw or oll ag: abe rancersd
out ragant ts pest fase wiitteattoa, provided LUA
thoen_te rmecals iu ovidance of fF
Gesire to cog; urate or cumini aM Ye ule to agsire Voadtarters
that the fleld ta now of om that '9EP ics making a gincere end
energetic e*fort to cal e giffientt task, We have no cone
plaiuts at the ores ag te the hendting of that vart of the
(neaiwatse It will te anopoctated if

nregrem whieh touches EULA
this can bo mada clear Uy th » offiedal tozponatble for Mass: on

with the Escapee Propran in + dushinstons .

Z
CELL 1h ee
Diote

eee sea wart (2) -RECIET



--- Page 43 ---
14-0000

ac ne atte ene ee ee

9

sf

te ete ee ernie te oe,

‘ oe)

-: 56 ara
. “.

However, BPD Ge-wany hae advigad OFC that a fora has bean deviced to
dotoraine this inforaation and that thio fora was presented to the —
egencies, for thatr uaa, on Desester 7. They have been asked to report

on all pereons asslated.

(>) Questions What, if any, project exists to reliove TB incidence
agong this group?

Supplesental aid io primarily designed to helz escazces caintain’
or recover thair hoalth, 411 agoncios know that evidence of poor hoalth,
supported by advice of a doctor, euthorises apecial foot suppleconts.
USEP funda can ond have bown wood to provide better iiving conditions
aiso. The Tolotoy Foundation and AFRF have apont $7,550.45 on supplo~

Bontal food, including additional food at the trea special inotallations.
Ho figures are availeble es t¢ thy exect number of 73 Soviet escapeed who

have boon aoatotod,

(¢) Gueation: How many povple havo recolved jobs through the
efforts of the agoncion?

(1) Through the Kaitooralauutera project, 40 Soviet escapees hava
beon pleced in Jobe and privase houuvtng found for 17 of thiu nuabver.

(2) During the recont review of agency casos, a2out 50 Soviet
eacapse0s proved to be omployed. In soca cases, agoncy participation
vas apporont; in othors, not. The deyros of agency aid in finding
theae jobs gould be difficult to pinpolat.

(3) Theru is aloo ovidence that ZO to 30 oncageas have enlioted
in Labor Sorvicu Conpanioo ao “othor nationalitiou”. Here aguin,
egonoy porticipation iu difficult to doternine, i

(4) Guantion: Mow pany have been ealgrated through efforts of the

agoncicu?

Aocording to tho Uctuber ruportea, the Tolotoy Foundation haa
obtained 94 vious fur Gocapees, in addition tv 432 visas under
Section 3(9) of tho DP Act. For tno ruvt of tho rfiocai yoar thoy
eoticato that thay will ubtain 1148 nore $(c) vioas add 53 othora,
4PR?, which hao juot otarted revuttlouent activitios, expecta to
obtain 15 visas under Suction 3(c) and 15 others.

(0) Guentions Io there any vocational trainiag or other vduca-

tional prograa? :

{1) Thora are theeo vocational training echoolse erattasie for °
od0ap000, with unused opace in all three, at Munich, Ingolotedt and

" Borlin. Training - “PEP ONEGO~PAYS Sqaphote caro and. maintenenco aro paid
- : Lor soe

oR SPRont USTiong

Fed


--- Page 44 ---
14-0000

re he : : a
ee ge en cee ee ne eernemtinctine a,

; a a ; VE ta ,
me SEGRE ;

BC

for by the Gersah Guvernment ond JSEP. The iarlofeli project, will,
hopefully, attack. the problog cayaing poor attendance, nasaly lack
.0f Anterost and poor accial sdjustaent. ©

‘ . vs - (2) Jno Worldte YECA conducte languaye training in Valka and
oe ° Karlefold. Other clasoos were discontinued due to jack of attendance,
Dut a caapatgn ie now in progress to rebuild the progran.

(f) Quastioa: “what housing projecte have been proiectod?
No further housing projects are contemplated until:

” (1) The “egoney counsellora vieit each family and definitely deters
mine tho problems facing then, and

(2) Tho present 126 to 146 spaces ure effoctively utilized,

| 13. Guention: Ghat are future plans for the itozs listed in para-
graph 127 .

. Tho fundeaontal shortcouing in tho USEP program te asyiat Soviot

". eacapoos is the fact that the counselling pragrea haa not beea conploted.
Once this has boen dono, EPD Geraany ent tho voluntary aguncios together
will dovalop a comprehonsive progres fur nooting all of the noedo of
the Soviet group. Thio plan witli undoudtedly include intor ‘alias

in operation. -

2. Incroaged supplemental and 23 fanilios are visited and their
nocda dotorainod. Clcso ouporvision will be exorcised tu angure
that the agencies relate thiv aid to the solution of the fauilies'
probleaa, including health difficulties and housing.

3. All ovcazves will te rogistored for eaigration, the oaploy-
ablos enong thea will] be trade-teuted, and arrangecentsa will be
eado to cnoure that the proper vocationai training 4a avellable to
those requiring it. In addition, assistance will bo bxtundod in
cloaring up lugai probloas facud by uscapees which might bar thea
from rovettlonont, The agencies will bo requirnd to subolt special
reporto on their sotivitios. .

4. Spactal afforto are being cada to revitalise tha vocational ”
training and 1m guoge training prograzaz. Past exporience indicates
that gucceae in thiv ondoavor will teu liaited. Eouvever, it ts hoped
that effoctive individual counvelling will eventually induce the
e0cepaes to take propor training.

ye

1. Bevelopmont, inprovement and ccupletion of the projecta now |


--- Page 45 ---
14-0000

on a Nn eee er ee ee

‘

“ SECRET ¢

wb i .. Z :

nee atvise4 OFS that a fora nae teen devioed to
fm and that thio forse wos presented to the
on Lecester 7. They have hoon asked to report

Hovever, BRL Je-aany
getersine tr inforsa
cteo, for t

exiote to relieve T3 incidence

mg thie group?

a: io primarily tesigned to help eacapoes caintain
or recover the:r nealtn. All @gencios know that evidence of poor health,
Supported ty ad eof a doctor, guthorises speciai food suppliszsnte.
USEP funds can 4 have been ueed ts provide bottor living conditions
aise, The Tolotuy Foundation and APRF have apent $7,950.45 on supplo-
fental fcod, including additional food at tho threo spacial installations.
No fi guree ‘available ag tc the exact nupber of TB Soviet escapees who

have Leon « ated.

Supp lemer

How sany people havo rocoived jobs through tho

(c) Sueotivoar
agencies? —

efforta of &

(1) Through the Katooralautorn projoot, 40 Suviot oocayses have
boon placed in Joba and private housing found for 17 of thia nuaber.

(2) During the recont roviow of egoncy caves, ebout 50 Soviet
eacapees praved to ba euployed. In seme casos, egonoy participation
vas apparent, in othero, not. The dogreo of agency aid in finding
theso joba would be diffioult to pinpoint.

(3) There 1a alav ovidonce that 20 to 30 oscapees have enlisted
in Labor Service Conpanica ca “othor nationalities". Hero again,
agonoy participation ia difficult to deternine.

} : e

(4) fusetioas How oany have been eulgrated through efforte of the
egenoicor

According to tho October reports, the Toletoy Foundation hao
obtained 94 vicas for oacapsos, in eddition to 432. vioas under
Sootion 3(c} of the DP dot. For tno rest of tho fiocal ycar thoy
eotinate that thoy witl obtain 110 core 3(¢) visas end 53 othora.
APR?, thioh hao juot oterted rogettlonant activities, ozpacts to
obtain 15 visas under Section 3(c) and 15 othore.

(0) Quention: Ie there any vocational training or other seduces
tional progreaP . :

(1) Thora ore theoa vocational trainiag achoola available for
eacagees, with unugad opase in ell threo, at Munich, Ingolotadt ead
Berlin. Training sapenees 7g? Sappieta core and esintenance ero paid

ar . "for ees



--- Page 46 ---
for by the Goraan Covernnent and USHP. The Xarlofeld project, #1li,
hopefully, attack the probdlea casing poor attendance, nagaly lack
of Antarost and _ Poor social adjustment, .

7 ; : : (2) the World's YEA conducts language training in Valka ond
Karlofold, Othor classes were diaccatinuod due to lack of attendance,
but a canpaign ie now in progress to rebuild the progras.

(f) Gueations What Acusing projects have boon projected?

No further housing projects are contoaplnted until:

(r) The agoncy ecungelloro visit each family and definitely dotor-
mine the problosa facing then, and

{2} Tno present 126 to 146 spaces are ettectively utilised,

| 13. Queation: What.are future plans for the iteaa Liotod in psra=

' graph 12?

“ Gho fundoaental anertcoaing in the USEP progrén to opsiot Soviet
eacapoou ia tho fact that tre couneolling progra: has not boen somplated.
Oneca thiy has teen donu, EP? Gorcaony and the voluntary cguncios toguther
will develop a comprohenaive progrea for neoting all of tho noeda of
the Soviet group. This plan will undoudtedly include inter alias

1. Developuent, ruprovement 62d coupletion of tha projects nog
in operation.

2. YIncroagod suppleaental aid as fanilies are viaited and their
néeodo doterpined, Closy siporvision will bo ezercisod to onoure ‘
that tha agencies relate this aid to tha solution of the faailics! i
problens, including health difficultios and houving, a

. . . 3. All ovcapoos vill ve rogistered for eaiyration, the oaploy=
ablog asong thea will bo trade-toutod, and arrangenocata vill be
pedo to cncure that the proper vocazionaj training {9 avel lable to
thooa requiring it. In addition, assistance will be exteaded in
clearing up logal protlesa fuced by oacapeoos which night bar thea
frea resettloavat. Tho cgencives vill bo required to gubait opectal
reporta on thuir activities. .

. : gd. Spoctal efforts are taing nado to revitalise the vocational
training ocd im guage training pogreaa. Foot oxporiance indicates .
that ouccoga in this cndeavor will be linited. However, tt to hoped |
thas effective individsal counselling will ove tually induce tho |
eacapoce to tare prorer training.

e372 “ttc Coplcs



--- Page 47 ---
. he Ngee a"

ORT Union, the World Yura, ante Lutheran Woris Federation. ithe
out exception, thoes agencioa have strong and re;utedia dgertcan
affiliates which aro accredited and recognised by the Adviecry Coa |
Bittoe on Volunts Foreign Aid. In tha eoft the dnertoan
affililato is thd National Council of the Churchee :f “christ, whooe
volfare organization ia tno\Church Werid Servies: 1 se accredited
by the. Advisory Comaittdge on Voluntary Porelg #2 eid to
in G00d otanding of thelAzoerican Counci) of Wountory Agencies for
Poroign Service, Incorporated. Thu opocific rogutrenente for qualt=
fication are not nov. aovasladle; hovevor, it 19 beileved that to be
qualified for accreditation by the Advioory Coauittoe, an agency suct
bo oupported by voluntary oubocriptione, and huganitorian tn character.
It io voiiovod that agencieo wholly political ore not eisgidle.

9. uestions What ia tha status of the proposal to fora a Ruesian
labor. conpany vhich oy underatend has been approved in Vaonington®

General agroomént on the formation by YSAREUR of a Labor Sorvico
Unit conpriood of Soviet ascapeos has boan reached by US KUCOH and
USAREUR. Thio project now only ceaita final approva! from the Depart=
mont of Aray ag to cortain detailo, (It fo undorstocd that the Aray
hao alruady agroed to the proposal da princtpal.) It to antlolpated
that the project vtll be fapleuented in tho near future,

Tha Unit, which will bo ausigned a guard aioselon, will comprise
initially 100 officers and non. In addition, ono san to aot aa otaff
advisor to USAREUK on-cattero affecting the Unit will probably be
rocruf{ted. This pugition should have a field grade of pornaps a
Lieutenant Culonul, Tho pursunnel calling of 1CO aay bu ralood to
200 should it appuar destrable in the light of experience. In order
to avotd tho appeuraice of vupporting Great Kuoatan or utnority
national auperationu, the shoulder flaoh for avubera of the company
‘would bear the nase “ROSSISKIY" or Huevian Poople, rather than
“RUSSKIY" or Ruesianu.

. Iu the courge of ao recont discussion betwaen ropreyentatives of
CAS, U.S. EUCOH, und tnia office concorning thiy prepoual, general
agrootent was reavhud on the following pointes

8) Leadership in the conpany should de recruited frua the nore
recont Soviut eacapues or defeotora, rather than frop the older “ouigre”
groups

b) Efforta should be made to rocrult the maxioum pooviblo nunver
froa the oocapeos roglatered vith USSP, and

¢) The TZOPE group should be strongly represonted in the company.

stags 4 . 10. Question: ees
peUdC a



--- Page 48 ---
tee

scenery ¢

ote

10. Suestion: Have any stops boon takon to get the Clemency Board
of HICOG to pardon Soviet oscazees sentencol for siner offenses con-
aitted in an attespt to ourvive, thus clearing their rocordso? do you

: Want ug to coke any pitch on this?

In the past, petitione for clecency have cniy teen presonted to
the Clesency Board of HiCOS when a porson vas under active conoidoras
tion for, reoettieaent, Tho Ciemancy Board hae usually acted eviftly
with tha baat interest cf the individual smi of the J.S, Govornaent ©
in aind. Recontly, however, stopa vere taken to initiate petitions
for clemency on all casea of the typeo centioned in question 10. It
fa too carly at the provont tice to foresee the result of thts opora-
tion. Hovever, it 49 Ltelfovod that 4+ ia not yet necessary for CAS”
to approach tne appropriate officials on thie point.

i, Oneation: is the USEP policy to reduce the niadbora who can be
holpod under tha Prograa? If true, what ars the reasons for this policy
which appeara on the aurface to be « otep tackvard frou eclving tho
prodlea?

It fa not the USEP policy to roduce the nuuters vho cat be helped”
undor the Evcapuo Frogrea, Ao 4a cattor cf fact, tha JSEP casyvload haa
continucd to iIncredve despite tho fact that over $,C00 havea been recot~
tlod, and cany have been dropped for various reagona, including inoli-
gibility, local integration,-end doath. It fa true that the primary
purpoga of the Frogras te to recottio eligibles abroad, end to integrate
losally thous whovy revettlecent potential ia low. Thio sction, of end
in itsalf, dowa tend to reduce the nugber of perasns vho cen be subsae
quoatly belped under the Progrea, It ta alec the policy of tho Prograa
to croate an atuvsphoro in which other prograsa ehich depond to a core
tain extcat upen tho peycholugical attituds oxiating in caigre oiroles
cen oporata succuunfuliy. In furthering thia particular objootiva,
tha Frogroa haa rucontiy taken action to declare aa eligibls those porsone
who, although having records ev rinor oriainals, ara of tntorest to U.S,
agencies, aw havy brcadonod tha basta to aceopt any Soviet -citisan ag
eligible if hv has in cny way been under disatpline cf tho Suviet Govern=
pont oince January 1, 19456

12, Guertioa, What Loa tho Escapee Progrea acccazlished fur Soviet
eocapaoor

USEP'e easiotences to eacapaes ta based prigarily upon the neods.
of cach indivigual regiutered witha the Progrea, Yaeso needa ara doter=
Bice? througn a counvalling progrea untor which ths woluntery cvanciea
cooporatiang with USEP sro cauppovod to geal casa worzera to the field:
to tatorvivs cach eacapos fcatly to detoruina thair particuler coodu,
background, prodisaa, oxperiencea, cabditioza, azi gaaeral oftuatioa.
Based upon thie interview the agency fa supposed to devolop o apecifio

[Tapes

Se x plan eee

gla:

(0
ee.

7



--- Page 49 ---
“aset te Comp!

Seg
a EGRET _ .

tence fur tha featly witn the daoto objootive being
resettieaent i5 a country of isalgration or, if thie

a the soonosy of their pres
Although t Eacapea Frogran Divioion
erations Mission for Gervany hao contracto vith both

dat ion and AYRF to carry cut a counsalling progres for

and bh azant appreriuately $14,000 on oach agoncy -

tn inis cunaedtion, to data the agencies havo not conpisteiy counselled
a. of onda. Accordingly, it fe aoot difficult to cake any
ging of is of tha apount of asesstanca rendorod a6 ¢ccopored to the
ettont of need. On Deconbdor 7, roprecentatives of both agoncios sore
adeisood by the Kaconpog Prograa Divioton, that tha counselling prograa
ted in tho noar future, and that USEP 7411 be in a such
bettor porition ta evaiuato tho progres of assiotance to Soviet sccapoes.e

:

Dospito the adnittodly ureatiofactory situation outiined in the
previous paragraph, oertoin positive ection hag boon tekon by tho EPD
and the voluntary agencies to provide agsaletanco to Soviet occapeoa.
Roportedly, AFHP haw diatributed in the neighborhood of 813,00 {fn
aupplemontal] noslatance in tho fora of food, slothing, ledging, otor.,
to eacapees rogintorod in‘their caseload. Tho Tolstoy Poundation hag
Uloetributed in the noighborhcod of § 00. In aldition, threo speetal
housing eid projeota nave boon eatadiished in Gersanys: tho Friendship
Hougea in Munich with a capacity of 19 yaracns, and the conter in
Kaloeralautura, with o copacity of 35 == both sponsored ty aPB?, end
the Tolotey hega in Karlafeld vnich has a capacity of 6) to 100, A
word about.oaon of tha following inatallationas

The Friontohip Youge in Huaich 49 sail ead ta elweyo full. Tho
length of otuy varices por individual es ita primary puryzosa ta to fur~
nioh tenporery housing for Rusalan escayeas who cons to Lunioh looking
for work. In cosa vaves these forivds of roaidonaa have drapgcd out.
At this hose fuli oaro end uatnteaanse to givon, oa the residents ore
soatly ineligiole for relief granta in Eavaria,

the Karlofela hougy vas opened oa Septenver 4 and hag aoveptad 25
eecapces to date. In addition io the fact that cach epplican’ ta
ocrooned by the eyonsy end than sy 8 consulate and USCP ropronontative,
tho edoisuion process Lu ccoplicated by the neod to trénofer unenploy=
cent ani relief bonefYitoe frea other areas. While thio inatallation ta
not moent to to a houoing prosest cf doat=peresacnt quarters, the type
of oid necdod by coat paresna selected vili Protadly reoult ina fairly
etodlo population, coco the home 4a filled. The Kaiserulautera hoe
Yoported, ai of Novenbor 151

19 current residests ‘
1l pergona covel to privata quartora .
3 porcona Eoved to Labor Carvics Uaita
10 persona returned to forzor residonce
2 dependento placed in sobs
48

Wide were AR, mene,



--- Page 50 ---
14-0000

‘ ananemnmtmanmcrmmcan ian ree

denen ee em eT

All te paogee, piso other dopondante, Fogeos
facilities thoro. pondento soved to

or voro aides cy tho egoncy

Kateerelsuternaniy sftor private quarterd vara jocated./ Of the total,
at lonet furty-tnred pearagnd had, at ono tine or anothers Lived in the ©
neu Tt cuat te eaphaoiged that thio inatallation to not regarded ©
os porpanent noveing but vas erected aoloiy to houses eocapece toapor=
arily Cor vrea gota had been found and who noeded quarteré untii they
Gould iocats percanont pillota. pnorefore, aacapeso bre referred horo
only when jes cpyortunitiod exist and etry only until private houatng
ba located, At vne tioe, consideration aa given. to filling tie house
vith enploywant, potentiala, but the cgency desurred for fear the Foject
would bo ruined by {noolu'

ablo ovralo probless an
able opaco to saut quicaly

through the coentor

euployuent TeQusreadgatee

To au.ezarice on the quootion of “houslag. projecte™, and apart ‘fros
nowaing tn the Geraan. acunGays, inotallaticaa for spacial purpooes core
conaidorgd end theae threo subsidised: 2} the benefite dorived froa
tno Friendohip Hos9e in Munien are voing evaluated, ard vill bo dlew
cuoaed at tho furthooning conforenca} (2) the Karivfold Heuee hae
yocantiy boon gpenod and filling it sa boing dolayos oy & rothor cupder=
use aereoning prvcaga, but a proceuy required to beet our oecurity
royulreconta- and tho reguirenonts of the Munich Consulate gZenorals ond
(3) the Kalseralautearn Huuse hoo been rather effectively used, being
tioited by the nugbers of jad opportunitios. Until vo are convinced,
howaver, that full or almvot full tenvfity aro veing cortvod froa thea
hovua, YIEP 1s reluctant ty gotoblion additional housing projgote ofa
teaporary neture and tt lo oontrasy to USEP policy ty enter aunty long-
tora arrangoucnts whioh would bo enteilea in provision of permanent
housing. :

lo for. hovoing within the
fa nado cacag that oontrol-
goe housing veing

enerally ora g@ligib
h fur this bouging
aroarked in noe ref,

Purther, vovapacd &

led by the Wohnungeant or 10 6
pull. Eocopecs ar rogras of $15 million

vhioh i@ current ly being dieoupsed by FOA ond tho Gorman Fodorol
Repadito (see DEPTEL to Bonn US¥OTO 455, paceaber 15, 19550).

oviet children were sent to Switserland for

Aadstioually, 50 9
tion for e4ght veeke loot oucaor at 6 cost

rehabilitation ani a vacu
of 63,907.

qo} Kagations How many ex-Suviote hava Yoosived woat ssoiotance

and how guoh for cara & Maintenanco?

out above, the incomplete and ynoatiafactory etatua of
progects of the agonvies, plus inadequate or unavati~
da the posaibilities of doteraining how pany Soviets

nat acesarance and how much for Cero & Haintenances

ao pointed
tha coun
adle file
havo rete.

However, see


--- Page 51 ---
14-0000 .

Toxs of Jeouery .D 1953. cable. (Confidential)

* : " “Eooal Uaste are advieed that effective dened Soviet defectors
_ who cocaped cinco Jan 1, 1945 way be considered oligitie for
i _. Conplote prograa esatotanve. Units ohid coapleto rogiotratioa
po of thig croup in cach area oad advioe OFC of nugbere regiotored.
: Bvory -offort ohld bo wade to create cazinus progras inpact oo
Sov, oo0aneea in eachiarea. It 4a reasfisod that extoncion of
Py eligibility to thio group cay cause cowe roporcugaion asong _
otbor natioaality groups and the egoies supporting thea. It te
cot. 7 pointed out hovover that great cajority Sov defectors are
‘ e@ligiblo undor previsiono para 6 & 7 of Provioional Guida #2.
| Woroovor Calta chld teke all feasible soaguroo to oiniuizo
.Yepercussions by oxerciging utnost digereticn in implosontation
4 of thia inatruction o.g. by discussing it prtwarily only with
: Ggeios interested in thio group." .


--- Page 52 ---
14-0000

'
2 ; 9
Toxt of January 20, 1955, cables (Confidential) Lo
. 7 "Soviet defectors roforred to in Frankfurt te] cont Vienna 83,

Rose 87, athens 102, Tricate 39, Iotanbul 43, Geneva 21 -for
Cdrooa ohld bo generally interproted as those Sov citisons or -
Sov Usranions who Jeft Military or Gort service since Jan 1945,
or their dopondéots (para 6 of Prov Guide #1). Local Units may
also oxtend assistance’ to auch other poot Jan 1945 Sov eocapoos
who qualify under Para 7 of Giide #1, excepting hard core DP's

Or persona who have teen in refugee atatus prior to World War II."



--- Page 53 ---
14-0000

Toxt.of inetructions teeved to all field unite Decenter 19536

“Hogardlesa of his country of origin, any Iron Curtain escapee whe,

. during the period 1945 to the proaent tine, was voluntarily or foretdly
repatriated, but who preceeded no further than the Esstorn iczee of
Gormany or Auat¢ia, and was detained in the Eastern Zonea cf Sernany

: or Auotria under the divoipline of tha Soviet. cccupation forces cr was

! euployod in an official, seni-official, or ary other cepacity, regerd-

: less of thé nature of hta eaploymant, by or for the Soviet occcpation

i forces, and who eubsequontly defected, fled, escapod, or otherwise
returned to the Weot, for ary roason. should be considered eligitie

~ for USEP asoiatance, provided he ia otherwise eligiblo.":

+
4
i

Your attontion io again directed to Section 7 of Guide #1
ehich authorises you to mako oxceptione tn any individual case,
rogardleoss of eligibility oriteria. .



--- Page 54 ---
14-0000

3. Questions

‘Doge JSEP plan !> ozort tixhtor arg conatant’ managesent
control over thie ;roject, o9 against the prosont eyotes of hands-off
Untl) énd-oudit, or ie thie tapossible because of regulations? If the
atter ie true, who haa the pover to change tha rogulations, and is it
poeelble fur. them to be changed within the contert of overall USEP policy?

Short of involving tteelf or its ataff in the actual iaplenenta-
tion of projects or in voluntary agency operations, USEP caintains a
ny and roview of every project aid contract into which
nt hee entured. Inforsation developed by field officero in the course
of thie review 1s passed to the Chief of tne Eacapoe Progras Division
tvacerned, who evaluates the material and discuseos it, whonesppropris
ate, vitn the local agency director. Sudsequent to this evaluation
and dincusston #ith the agency, tho osterial isa forwarded to OFCEP
wnich cakes a sacond analysie and, if indicated, divcusseo it with
the agancy's, Eurccean Director. There ia no policy of hande-off until
the eni-nudit ia agade. End-useeaudits are an integral. part of the
review of projects in ordor to detercine ther or not the supplies
and services ure reaching the escapees. . .

Sontinuing ecruth

In the light of thea preceding paragraph, the latter part of the
question becomes acadesicy however, JSEP policy in this respect is
flexible and can be adapted to any aituation warranting a aodification

of procodurea.
.

2. Questions What ia tho interpretation of “local pettionent™? If
a oan ia earaing a atatinctly oubsarginai exiatonco, which ooans an
unhealthy and unhappy existonce, La he autosatically ruled out? Who
caile the shots on this, USEP or tha agencies? .

Local sottlesent iu not prodicated avlely on ecuonoais factors.
Rather, local eettiosen: doponda upon a varioty of conditions obtain~
ing in tho case of a particular fooily. Consideration auat, of noces-
aity, be given to the Juba of the principal wago-carnoro to detoratus
vhothor or not they are working in an occupational area coat suitable
to their desires, background end ability; to thoir wages to detorsine
whether or not theis earnings are ouffictont to moot tha noedo of their
fanily; to their nuusing to-doturning if tt is adaquate; and othor face
tore waich nuot be considered in connocticn witn a fesily'e fir intaq
gration into the local conaunity, including its own attituda toward
euch intogration. It :6 not tno policy of USEP to place ‘a fan cr a
feaily on en inoligiblo or inastiva lint av a jocaliy oattled caso 417
he fo oarning a diosinctly sutcarginal ex:otenca. The decision of
Yocal settlenent iu esto by the Chivf of the Escapee Prograa Division
concerned and only after a carefu} onalysio of tho ottuation obtaining
in each particular cosa. Usually the Divioion Chief's decision ia
Rasod upon the recunzundaticn of the voluntary agonay a9 analysed and
evaluated by USEP officers in the field. . .

rae 3. Guestions ee



--- Page 55 ---
14-0000

gy : A ;
Le . - ’ ae ae tJ

- an 3e Questions Wnat io planned to eliainate the duplication in caseload
of the two egenci

ee enema mene
i
‘

Duplication in cadeload tetweon the various voluntary age:
Farticipating in the Eacapoe Prograa has .bgon clininstod to an az
.piadle extent. It nas existed principally in pho cage of two asenctes - °
. in Gerasny dealing with the.Sovi Froblea --"Tolotoy ~Founda dea and
aporican Friends Or Rusofon Froedcg, This, hovever, wos resolved on
Dasoaber 7, 1953 at a Seoting of tna two agonctos with the Cnief
Bacapeo Prograa Diviaion/USCNs.. at this nooting tha Tolatcy Fountation
waa given principal responsibility for ot1 cago which havo 4 resettianw
mont potential. AFRF vaa given-ell cagoo which had linited or x.
resettlenont potential and cust, of necossity, bo sottled lccaily ta
the Geraan coonoay. Ths o: ery care and maintenance waa dividad
arter a thorough diecusaiun vith eacn agency by Gutual agreenenz. This
action resultod tn estudlishing a cayolond in Gergany of 79 cases cone
giating of cope 100 pavple for TP, and 102 caseo with approxinately
| SCO poople for APR¥. Now regtutranso by vithor egoncy will be raverred
. $9 Est¢epoo Pregraoa field represontativos (in Gormany, Munich) fora
ebock agsinot, current card files. after a dussior haa been fi .
devalopad on the case, a detoraination ao to the appropriate agency
vill be cade according tv the case'a recetticzont potential.

Fre--

4. Questions Wnat are the criterta for accepting a Soviet escape as
@ rolief rocipiont and wnat office or regulations deteralne saz?

Thora ic enclosed the basic proviaional guide concerning eligitie
Aity, tegother vith sudsoquont clarificatiuna issued to the field on
tha Sovioto. This 12 tho uriteria undor wnich o peraon Le oxtuniad,
ani dociared eligible for, Progran usuistence. Theos reguleticas vere
cdapted frea.a Goneral pulicy isuusd by tho U.S. Dopartnent of State.
Within the fresowork of these regulations, the hecapus Progrea Justa
@ oecurity investigation waicn catablishos a aarta oligibility grca ar
oosurity point of view. Sicultesesuoly the nan 19 counselled in en
effort to detorsiny tiia needs from a aucivlogical and economics angie.
Tha rooulta of these investigations detorzinu the course cf action
upon whioh the Escopees Progras proceeda, Houvever, ta the na
eaz0a, hucaniterion sagi:atencea ia extended to individsalse pond
ecaplote aaourity inveatigution, or until] 90 ‘
tory to dony oligibilsty 210 discoveres. (A

“to paragraph 7 of tha eligtbility guido, wale
eligibility on any individual or individuals of interes:
agencies, regardlegu of normal eligioility criteria.)

5. unsttonr What is the source of tha policy whtcn Aaiateing tat
a thore cuvt bo a loaning-cvoresbackward to avoid tho riak of ary Foutsteal
Auplication in applying the USEP progran? .

~ see
° Tha Eacazee ace

. . : »
. oo Ere gs
> te

wuss s



--- Page 56 ---
14-0000

ve

~. eertain supplies and services to eecapace of recont date. Inaeguch

“takings ehich have political tuplicationo, it waa deteruined that the

ees ec Tt OE eee ah ae SMR NES EEA

9 BRET 8

ae

The Escapao Progrea vao-originally outlined tn DEPCIRTEL 676,
Jenuary 29, 1952 (Top Secret) which indfoated that tho Progres vould
be undertaken through contracts with voluntary agencies tu provide

.Gp the largoot and moot laportant voluntary agoncteos oporating tn
“Europa are of religious nature ant endeavor to stay clear of unters

Eacapoe Progrea would suppreas .o the oxtent powalbie tne positic
nature of ita operations in order to secure and saintain the “good
will" ant cooperation of thee agonciee. In our raiattonships, howe
ever, with cortain agoncies of ethnic charector (c.g. APOR —“*Azorican
Fund for Csechoslovas Refageas), onpacially when these agencies are
directed by individuale in whoa USEP has couplote confidence, little,
1f any, action hao been taken to suppress or dioguiee USEP political -
Auplications., Thoro 10, howaver, 1 tendanoy on the part of USEP offie
ofalo to supprese political inplicatione of the Progran in their errango=
genta with soveral agoncios -- duo to thoir lack of confidence in the
leaderohip of thoae egenoies. ray Sohaufuss, Tolatoy Foundation)
Sheba Coodnan, Auorican Frionda of Rugaian Preodsa; Lax’ tr aude ,Organt=
sation for Rohabilitation thro; reinings ang Matocn otters tional
Roscue Couaittess and Uichael Teta ton ted Ukfainian gzericcea Rolle’
Cosalstos; aro oxouzlos of Diroctora in whom USEP hao little confidence.
Thig lace df confidence srives frvua the fact that thooe poraonalitiss
opparently havo thoir own azoa tu grind. USEP hag revonied, hovaver,
and will contiuso to rovoal to a linited oxtent, tho political nature
of the Evcapos Progras ta cortain selected persona tn tho voluntary
aganatos who ere oubjavt to the novessary degrog of direotion, and in
whoa: confidence cay bea calntained. Thio oourge of action to motivcted
pricardly by tho fact that political overtones uf the Prograa cannot be
wholly hidden frca.en inteliigont parson, yot it ta not in tho Progres's
deat intorost tu advise officially tho religious bodioo of the political
aspooto. Although the uajor religious agencios undoubtadiy are avare

of the political aspects of the Progren, thoy ohooaa to ignore thea go
long a6 thay are not involved directly into any political oporationa,
and eo long aa they are not adviged officially of thea. ~~

&. Sinn veto thera eny peano through which asalatance tu deserve
ing ceubory vu: 2OPE (already on tne caseloads) can bo spoeted up?

USSP officials throughout tna arca ere continually endeavoring to
Gpecd up Progrea benefito to the ulticate rocipioutea, Thio 14 spptica~
blo tu tha entire cagoload of a1] agencies end hoa not din tho paot boen
predicatc’ upon tosbeurebip iu eny organisation which exy or gay cot be
of intergat to U.S. Governzent agensios, In thio way, USE? undeavors
to extend Progrea bonefitw to all shoss oligible uithout foousaing
unnasazcary ottentson upon individual sondors or a particular orgsaisa-
tion -of interest to sgonciea of the U.S. Governuont. Further, USEP

see offictals see



--- Page 57 ---
14-0000

an sain x oo Set te ree oe Sea eS .
Y xt

mo 8 abuct  &

ve no way of dotersining ehether on cocapee ta or ia

vf TCOPS. Hovever, if Cad deotree to furnish USEP with a
rkat of TLCPS Geaderghip, OFC will Foguest the JEP Divielone in each
‘country to confer aligibdility on tho individuala 1.atet and to pay
particular attention tnat euch individuala aay receive personal atten-

tion in the future.

2 efttetats
not a- ees

a .
» 7 ae Questions 10 there any po@eibality of eitatnating Tovetoy and
ue + APRP caltcgether and doing thie job through another agency or agencies?
In consideration of thiy question, USEP has relustantiy Jectded

that 48 would not be Foosible to pliatnate Tolatey Pountatios,
Tolotoy ie an old, estadliohed agency with a fane-known and roapectea
vithin certain onlgre ecirciog., It aay bo soostble, however, for Tas
-to undertaxe tna eliugination, olthough VAS relaiiononhips with TP and
“Ste Board of Directors are unknown to thio officg, Since aFh?¥ ie a
rolatively nev orgonisation, and the character of ita Bursy lealor=
ohip ia cuch mory undooirable than that of Toletuy, ft ta voncelvadle
| that APSF could bo olfainated frou tho Hugetan fivid ccnelseradly easier
than folotcy, Moreover, ag the Chairaan of the Board cf the Ar2P 19 4
: retired U.S, Adatral, ho would prebably ba inclined to ge atong with
: the wishes of Governaent officials if it could ba ohown that tho ali-
. ainatioa of aFRF vaa in tho bout interest cf the U5. Jovernmant.
Hovavor, the eliaination of othnia type ogencies tn thia respset would,
, perhaps, ceazel tho Eecopeo Progrea to enter into rolatronsnipe with
a religious agency, o-g. the WCC, in their stead and the successful
resolution of the Soviet problen would becone autvoaticaiiy auch gore
aiffioult.

0. Queaticn: How dova an agency qualify for a USEP contract? What

gro the reguiresenta for qualifications

USEP currently hoo contractual arrangenante with 22 vuluntery
aostoties reyroventing the sajor religious dedies (i.e. Vathoiics, Jeva,
and Protestants) and the cajor othnie groups represented tn tho popula-
tion of the tad States of aAuorica. To qualify for a JSEP vsatract
the egancy, if it 18 wholly Apurican in coaposition and incorporated
under the iawy of one of tho 48 Statue, or the Diutriet of Coluadia,
must be cccretitul by what wos known o3 the Departcoat of Statete
Advisory Cozzitwes on Voluntary Yoreiga aid, and which is nova part
of FOA. The Executive Director of this Conaittes ig Ur. Williaa Bs
UoCahea, wae 29 ai90 6 oteff ceuder in the Office of the svatatent
Direster for Refugees ard Migration, FOA, In addision to shuoa agencies
vhiioh have teen incorporated in the U.S., USEP alvo entora into rela- .
tionehipa with ether organizations which aro international tu aharacter
and copposition =~ such as tho’World Ccunodi of Churchea, tho“Vorld

ORT woe



--- Page 58 ---
14-0000

REGTR IIT St SE: VY NERS TICN

IROVISICIAL GUIDE NO. Lb July 17, 1952

GRITENIA FOR UNICRITY AUSISTANCE JUDER ESCAPEE P OGRA

ie Security Act of 1952 provides’ the basic legislative |
authority {or tna Escapeo Fregrana and thus satablishes tho elementary, cri-
teria fer extending assistance. :

Section 14 (a)(1) of that Act authorizes the expenditure ‘of 4 $12
not to oxzeed $100,C00,0C) "for any celected persons whe ore. residing in cr
escapnag from the Sovict Unien, Foland, Czochoslovakia, ilungary, Rusania,
Bulgaria, Albania, Lithuania, Latvia and Eatening er the Communist daminsied
or Communist secupled areas of Gorsany end Austria, and any other countries
cbserbed by the Sovict Union either te fem such persons inte alscents of
the nilitary ferces supporting the Nerth Atlantic Troaty Organization os
for other purpeses, whea it fu similarly dotermsina! ty the aresidont that
such asalutence will contrivute to the ce‘eaue of the North Atlantic area
and to the security of the United States",

2. Gfficiils carrying out thia program she ld net become involved in
conpiex, tinc-conyunligs jrucodures in determining priority for assistancas
It is expecteet that a yusitive approach tevand priority wi.i be taken and
thet criteria will macgn e+ sinple and broad is consistent with UsSe
interests. It follews 7nat aid ghould be given’ imsudiately to pursens who
apparantly meet the pri-pity eriterta uutlined celsa and should be withdram
enly 1f reaszonavlo evidence is broucht forward which indicates that the
persen dues not meat thevo critersa,

3. The intent and purpose of th rogram is to ald now eucances fray
comiiist opsrosdicn. “hatever the merits of aiding perscns who wore dis-
Placed before, during, or goun aftor II, such atd is not nemaily
sim of thiga program Ucreover, quite apart fret any other cons
et regras does not nave sufficient funds te assist pany
parsons ether ti those who have rece. : from benind the [roa
Curtain. In the feruzoing perspective, tho following tordia vill be utali-
zed by tho Wiiss:.ng in accerd ifdority for assistance.

be Federity for agsietance in resettlement and fer s atamy care

will bo granted any perpon whe escaped after Junuary 1, 194 ma the USSR,
Polard, Letvia, Lithuania, ditonia, Czec..calovakia, Hungary, Ruaania,
Bulceria or Albania,

Se <ithta tho bread senfincs of the above, there will te certain
Pergong whes thy United States ebviously will not desire to assist avt there
will be others whoge status in thedr country ef rv. enco after fiight is
puch that’ they peasese the rights und oi retLENS OF Shenadty of tho

. cowitry an wich they have tuken asylu:

RESTRICTED SECURITY INFOs iO tt —)

BD Fo LOG SOS



--- Page 59 ---
14-0000

a,

Jee am met ant ame

Pee re wee

RESTRICTED SUCURITY INFOR 7 [0N
;FROVDiON:L QUIDE NO. I (cont)

“CRITERL. POH PRIGRITY. .SSISTANCE UNDER ESC. FEE PROOHM

Assistance wil] thus be denied to or withdrawn from any porson whos

he Is @ Comnunist acont. . te

B. Ja a forier Nazi or flazi collaborator seexing to eschpe just punidas
ment, for criges committed during World war II against Allie’ por-
gonnel or ogninst civil populations.

C. I3 a common criminal.

D. Has unreascnably refused reacttlenent cppertinitios.

E, Is recognized by the compotont authorities of tie cowitry in which
he resides a3 having the rights and cbligations which are attached to
the ressession of citizenship of that country ee. Gorman rofugees
and expellees, persons of Turkish athnic origin fron Rumania and.
Bulgariagare exclude? from asxiotance under this paragraph.

F. Has teon satisfaetorily sottled locally.

&, Assistance will bo oxtendod, howovor, te these sersons otherwise
eligible wiier the provisions of this circular who defoct from diplomatic,
other official or somi-official missions or delegaticna chile abroad in

the sorvice of thoir country.

Te Missions are authorized to nuke individual exceptions, regardless of
datolino, when such oxcopttons are in the tatorest of the v

lated fields. hen requosteu oxcoptaicna are Mt favorably sna id
the Country Unit they must be roferrod te tte Sperial init prior to final
actions A

Som OF pergI.3 whe wou. s not endinarily

Jish eacaped ant austrian ajwwe and
ble a3 a unit.

8. A tantly group containiig a |
be assisted dua to natienality, cess
who aro othorwisu eligibly snould be considered e2

gollity will rest with

9. Basic responsibility for duterminatica of ¢
2 duvise ways and

tho Local Uaita, Howavor, it 19 oxpocted that they w
Boons of utilising loral Lactlittes and offteddls to a mucigua extent in
amor to assist the Lrcul Ustt La discharging tata responaibility. In the
ovont tho lecsl unit requires further oyaistanes in reaching un cligibility
docizicn, the cial Unit may bo called upcn by the Local Unit fur infore
gation or edvico. i .

RESTRICTED :


--- Page 60 ---
14-0000

|

DY ne RAE age een

RESTRICTED. +> SECUR.TY TNFR MATION

“ADDENDUM
To
PROVISICMAL QUIDE WC. 1 oxi m4

CRITERIA FOR -FRECHITY JSSISTAIEZ UNDER ESCAPES PROGiAU

Toxt of tole-ccnference recotved from Lopartmont July lu, 1952
in azplification of critwurio cutiinod wmdor Frovisional Guide #ls . t

Pe en

“FEP Program 1a concornod with oscaposs from Sovdot or Soviet

" dontaated areas. In view fact FEP funds are limited and bocausy of
logielativs hivtory of progran priority cr proferuncy suat be given
to tore rucont oscapecs auch 63 thea who oscopod eaftur January 1,
19L8. Dociatons as to application of fund must aluo ba based on
reaulto which can bo achiavod tn wrnes of basic cbjuctives of programe
In other words wo are net distributing a limited rulic£ fund equally

among o designated mmbur of puc¢to. Bo aro more concerned with .

* thoes who have oucapod mere recently than those who havo beon tn the
rofuges state siniw World War I cr thosu who wore uprooted betweun

Soptorbor 1939 and January 1, 19.3. The date January 1, 198 1s an

SC ham AO ON OP I, - oe meee

adciniotrative duvice which shcutd not te rigidly applicd unless
Inter oxhoustion of funds incruasirgly requires this action. or

equal concern to IEF aro thy rusulta shich can bo achieved in terms

ae see

of reostsblishcent, rosettlonant, butter morale, otce, 09 betwoon

‘ ong prejoct snd ancther, Wo ehsut4¢ ecok sulf~liquidating, non-

ropotitive usoa for PEP finds, avcid to tho extent possible
Bccoptanco cf ruspensibilicios which camot readily bo ralinquishede

As cxparionce dovolops wsdl) ecko tho foregoing nore sclootive



--- Page 61 ---
14-0000

 anondngnt Ko. 2

to
Trovisdonal-Gaide lio. I. (cost)

GUT, FOL SMT TNY ASSISTANCE WEY SICMECE RRIGRAT oa

Sub parrzraph E of unnumbored paracrap) following paragraph five
of Provisivaul Suide No. 2 49 anendod to read: . ne
“EB, Ig recognieed by the ccapotent authorities ef tho country in

which ha reside or other country outside of tho area of

Soviet dortnstion a3 having ths richsa and obligations vhics
are attachod to tho possession o: citzenahip of that country
0.y. Gensan roiuzoos and oxpell209, Forszond of Turkioh ethnic

orizin frow kunanta and Sulyaria ure excluded from azuistance

unier tals pararaph."



--- Page 62 ---
14-0000

ghter and congtant sanegeaont
present rystoa of hende<off
te racause of regsiations? If. the
power zo change the regukations, and io it
anges within the context of overall USEP policy?
Snecteing ateelf or ito ataff in the actual inplerontas
satary agency operations, TSEP caintaine a
how of evory project end contract into which
lopod by field officere in the course
of the Eacapee Fregraa Division
and discusses it, whet approprin.
a eitn the lucal agency director. Subsequent to this evaiuatica
and discussion with the agoacyy the oaterial ta forwarded to CPOEP
which nakes a second analyaio and, if indicated, disse ait with
the sgonoz'3 Eutopeoa Director. There 18 no policy of b
the end-audit 43 made. End-usesauiito are on integral
reviow of projects in omer to datersine whether cr net %
and oorvices aro reaching the escapees.

-soacerned,

In tho light of the preceding paragTayn,
quantion bocones acadesicy hvwever, P
flexible and can be adapted to ary
of procodured. .

2. Gvoattount Bret -renthe-trterpseteben « &
a pan lo oarning a dtetineely

unhealthy and unhappy erioteac

calls tho ahuta on thie, YELP ur tre eaer

a.  facheras
uaitiong ubbalias
wat, of neves- -

Lucas sottisment te n.t jre:
Rathor, sucal settioasenrt depend
ing in the case uf a particular
‘aity, be given ty the [uta wt a ty 4eteraine
whother ur nut they ara e.reing ast suitable
tu their deogires, bacagrsaud and esl. dtye ts tneir sages ta doteraine
whether ur not thelr earsvinga are auffictent ts aeot the angola of their
foatlys ty thetr heualng © Jote:a: satay add other face
tore wlieor Buot be conaitered i5 = ‘ faaiiy'a flra inte=
grotion inty the local svnascnity, ttitada toverd
ouch tntogration, it
featly op an ineligidia
he 1 earning a dtetine ne dociaicn of
Jocal cottieaa.t se asie ty the . Pregrea Division
concerses aul coiy efter a <a f thé attuation obtaining

Sniefte decioion te

in each partsos.ar cade.
agency aa analyued and

y eattied caso if

ovaiuates by JSEP sfficere in

3s: ueattions

2 etl wo. ve

Ceppetecot of : Crpi3s



--- Page 63 ---
14-0000

48

— A ee a ER 2 er le EN EET

I
}
i
:

"SEGRET

6M) ett et Th elimisetea tte toy. etl ln lewescad

2 Ogencies

toy Foundation and

+ however, Uae resolved on

att a seoting of tne tes agencioa th the Chief,

Prograa Sivieion; USCS. at this aeeting the Tolatoy Foundation

Reipd! reaponeidility for al: cases which have a rogettle=

Bont potestia., APR¥ vas given all casus which hed linited or no

7 tel At potential and aust, of necaosity, be sotticd locally in

+ the Gersan econony. The supplementary care and saintenanco was divided
after a thorough discuasion with each agency by autual agreement. This
action resulted in ostablishing a caseload in Germany of 79 caseo con=
Oloting of soug 160 people for TP, and 102 cases with approxinatoly
200 peaple for APRF. Nev rogiatranta by oltnor agency vill deo reforred
to Eacapee Prograa field ropreaontativoa (in Ge-uany, Munich) for a
check againot current card files. After a dossier haa been fully
dovoaloped on tho case, a dotersinatiun aa to the aypropriate agency
will be sado according to the case'e rosettleacnt potential.

4. Qnestioa: What are the criteria for acco;ting a Surtet eacapee aa
@ relief reulpleat and what office or reguialiuns determine caso?

Thero 19 oncloged the bastv pruv.oiuna: gaite conterning eltgidl-
Aity, together with subsequent ciorlficativne lesvel tthe fieid on
tha Soviete. Thia fo the criteria untor ant eye mn to exteniot,
and docldrod eligible fur, Prograa espistan: oo reguiatiuns sore
adapted froa o gonoral policy toauol ty tho Lerartaent uf Tato,
Within the fresoverk of thease reguiatiun o@ Prugrea wontsote
@ geourlty inveeliyvatiun whicn eatat: ty fe
poourity point of view, Siaultanevue:y tre oan
effort to detoruine nie noade (rea a eve
The regultsa of thoes inveotigatiose detersine Ine cusres
upon ehioh the Bacapee Prograa yrucgot
oa500, humanitarian asalatease is eat
coaplote souurity investigation, or enti. aster
tory to deny eligibility 14 diecove
to paragraph 7 of the oligibslity guid @nicn enables “SEP t. confer
eligidility on eny individual or individsase of interest ty vther 7.5.
egonoies, regsriless of normal eligibility critorie.}

welty of,
4ing the

tiy tercge-
ty directed

5. Qeaation:s What t9 sho source of the polisy which maintains that
there Guet be a loaningeover-backvard tu evoid the riak of any political
Aeplication in applying the USEP progran?

The Eacapae oe



--- Page 64 ---
14-0000

Tho Sacapee Progras vas origi
January 29, iSS2 (Top Secret, wnic
bo undertacen through contracts
certain oupzite
go the ia:
Barope
torings ef
Escaz;oe Pr: graa
nature of ite 2;
whin 3
avor,
Pond
directec

‘
volack af confidence tn the

afaag, Tolascy Foundation
:aaian Prootyay; tag'Drasieyorceas~
: ning; ano Natoon,-thnteraticaal
Micnaalf@otye waited Tefainion Anoricea Heliée
ea of Dilectora fa whos YSEP hag little confidence,
to Sacw <2 cunficence arisea (rca tho fact that theoa personslitica
Syparently Lave ineir cen axes to grind. USEP hay revoalod, hovover,
ant wlil continue ty reveal to a linited extent, tho political nature
af the Eacapee Pryraa to certein selected persona in the voluntary
sgoncieeg uns sre subjovt to tha necessary dograv of dirootiou, end in
vneoa confidence fay oe waintained, nia course uf action 19 uotivated
primarily ty tha fact that political overtenes of the Prograa cannot de
wholly nidgen frcoa'an intelligant parson, yet it 10 not in tha Progras’s
teat interest ty alviog officially the religious bodioo of the political
Sopeute. asithvagh tha najor roligivus agoncies undcubtedly aro avere
of the polatical aspecta of tho Progrea, they choove to tanure theu eo
tong a0 they aro not tnvolved directiy into any political vperationa,
ant co lung aa they are not odvieod officially of thea.

Trpaitte; are eraaz

€. Guentions ard thero eny muana through which soeletance t+ deeers-
ing senbere of-T20PS (already on the caseloata) can bv dex up®

USEP’officials throughout the area are continually enteavering Vs
opood up Proyrca tonefita to the ultizate ceciptoats,
blo to the ontire caguload of ail agensias ani nas not
prodicateds upon coaberohip in any orgasisatio
of interost to J.S. Govornzent agencies
to oxtond Frogrea bonofita to all thoes eltgitio
unnedsasary attention upon individ wonrvers if

roy rr wes
:

re rae |

wk

tse Frograo. in their erresge-
2

D BEPRODpOT Ions .



--- Page 65 ---
14-0000

oe

LOPE CRN tee ee cet mene Se nie aN,

offioiaio havo no vay of dot raining vaethor en ocapoe ig or ta

Rot a sender uf T2OPS. Howe , 12 €a3 déaiz to furnteh USER vith «
_ hot of Tz0rz pogberanip, CPC ‘A421 roquest: the USE? Divisione tn each

country to confor efigiaility on tho individuals lated and.to pay

particular attention that ouch individuals fay recoive personal atten=

tion in the future.

- :
co -Queations Ia there any pogaibility of oliainating Tovetoy and :
. : ier Gltugether and, donee thie job through another agency or agencies?

In conaideration of ‘tne question, USL? hos roluctantly 4ec:4e4
that it auuld not de pcesible to eliainats Talstoy Poundation, s
Tolatoy ta on old, eatariitahed agenoy with a nape knovn and resp
within cortain onigre circioo. It cay bo possible, however, for 745 —
to undortaxe the olinination, olthough CA3 rolationships witn TP ant
ts Board of Directors are unknown to thia office. Since AFRF to s
rolatively.new organitation, end the character of ita Buroyean ioad
ship fo such odre untacirable than that of Tolatoy, i¢ 10 cuoncsetvad
that AFH? could be eltéinatdd frou tho Rugoien field ccnoidurod.y ens
thon Tolotey. Moreover, av the Cholfroan of the Board of tho aye? 1.8 4
retired U.3, Adairal, be would probably bo inclined to go slong wits
the eloneo of. ,Govornsent offictala if 4t could be chown that the eil-~
“pination of AFF eae in tho boat intorsot of the U.S, Governuent.
Uovever, the gliatnation of ethnic typo agencies in thio respout word,
porhaps, cuopel the Escapeo Prograa to unter into relationstipes with
@ roligioua agency, c.g. the WCC, in thoir otead and tho succesefs,
reeolution vf the Soviet probloa would become sutomaticaily sucn score

difficult,

QO. OQuertions How dove a: “agonoy qualify for o USEP contract® Unat
@re the requirenants for qualifications

.- . USED currently haw contractual arrangosonte vith 22 woiuntery
eoolotios reprosonting the oajor religious bedieo (1.0. Catholics, J
* ant Protestants) end tre cajor othnio groups repregonted in the popu
tion of tho United Statys of anorica. Yo qualify for a USEP contract
the agency, Af tt 10 wholly Aburicaa in coaposition and incorporated
undor the lews of one tho qu Status, or tho District of Coluabie,
rust bo acoredited by what was known aa tho Dopartcont of State's
ddviaory Cocaittoo oa Voluntary Foretga Aid, and which 46 nov a part
of Ci. ‘Tha Executive Director of thia Cozaittes ie Ur. Billios 4.
UsCahoa, who to clog.e utaff coubur in the Office of the Acetotant
Director for Refugees asi Uigration, FOA. In eddition to those agensies
whioh have boen incorporated in the U.S., USEP aluo ontere tnto ret
tionshipa vith other opsant zat yong which ore dntornationsl in jspsrector
snd copposition -= euch as the’ World Counoil of Churchos, theVorld

ORT wee


--- Page 66 ---
14-0000

4

steel

oS=
Me ue a

TX? Fatony the. Vorld YVta, aad the Luthoren World Federatica. Tithe
a have etrong and reputavle Acaficsa

accredited snd recognised by the ad
Foreign Aid, In tho cove of wed, th .
342 vf tha Churchea of chriet, whsse
(church World Sorvices it 19 accredited
by the ddvisory ‘eu da Voluntary Poroign Aid sad {8 a ecader
fn gisd atending of theliserican Gounet) of Voluntary Agoncies for

Zt ia delloved that agencies wholly potitieat” are wot iiteittes

x.

% “gueatioa: Waat is the status of the proposal to fora a Russian
pater comgany which we “wrderstand hoo deen approved in Beohingtoa? .

ae General agresaeat on tie forzation by USARSUR of a Lator Sarvico
Tatt.coapriaed of Soviet edcape@a haa bean reauhed by US BUCQY and
JSANSGR. Thio project now vnly avaito final approval froa the Lypart~
mest cf Aray ag to certaic detaiia, (It to understood that the aray
nas already ayroed to tha propoeal in principal.) it to anticipated
that the project will de iaplesanted in the moar future.

The Unit, which will te aga:gnad a guard oiasion, efli couprise
taittatly 100 officers aad cau. Tn addition, one aan to act es ataff
etviags to USAREUR on cattera affecting the Unit will protably do
Tesratted. This position snould have a field grade of perhaps a
Liestenant Colonel. The personnel coiling of ICO cay be rated to -
2X0 should it appoar destrable in tha iight of exparience. In order
Ys avold thd appodrance of supporting Great kusatan or ainority
national asperationo, the shoulder flash for moabera of the. cuapany
woall dear the naze “ROSSISAIY" or Rueatan People, rather thaa .
*RISSEIY" cr Rusgtana. .

in the course of a resont ciscugaion betwoen representatives of.
cas, U.S. BUvOM, and thia office concerning tnis proposal, general

| agreasent waa reached on tha following pointas

a) Leadorehip in the ccapany should be rocruited from the aore.
recent Soviet escapees or defectors, mther than frca the ciéer “saigre”

ereert - .

3) Efforts ohould be cade to recruit the maxzinua poosicle cunder
frca tho escapees registered wits USSPs and .

3} fo TCOPE group should be atrongly “sepresentaa in tae ceazaay.

YO. Ssostions ees

rey yi
Le ah, af

Peay



--- Page 67 ---
14-0000

‘le 5 J++ with the boat intoreot of. the
: , ry -otepa vere taken to int

PP seen

_Mave.any otop
piriicn Soviet: coc
ultted in on attesp?: to ‘ourv
want ue to poke -any pitch on thio?

; nithe pact, potitions for a
tho Clenoncy Board of HICOS vhon-a
tion for resottlesont. Tho Crese

in pind. “Rooontly, hotave

for cleaoncy on all caves. 0

to too early atthe progont tins to

-tion.. Hovever,

to approach the
i

i ,

Ll. Cunations Io tho USEP policy to Fr
‘halped under the Proyraa? If true, wha

. which eppeara on the gurfacy to bea
1 \ problea? |

It 1a uot tho USE? policy to reduse ‘
3 a caster of fact, the USEP cacuload heo

undor the Bacapoe Frograa. &:

eo - gontinued to incrooge doupito tho fac

. tlod, end cany havo baon droppod fer

gidliity, local intogration, cad daath.
tile eligtblosa sbro

7 nose reoottionont potéatial io’ low.

purpose of the Frograa ta tu rose
looally thooe wv

do itoolf, dosy tond to reduce. the u:
quontly bolpod undor tho Progreae It igo
to oreato on atwospnors in which other pve,

tain oxtout upon tho Foyohological a
can oporate succodsfully.. In furthe
ths Procrea has recently taken octio
who, although having reoords ag Bind
egonoies, aid have breadoned the bas
eligibio if hy nav in cay way 2oen u
went ofnoe January 1, 1945+

12, Giagticns What heo tha Lscapoe
goos power?

USEPto coviatcavs ty evcapzea 4d
og esoh individual rugistorad with ¢
wined through o.ooungelling progres
cooporaticg with USL? ars Guppases t
to datorviuey cooh cocapoo feaily to

iva, thue clearing their racer

{ndivigeal ant of the 3.5.
f the types centionad in
foroneo the rooult of thio operan

it fo belseved that 1t io n .
appropriate officiaia on thie point.

Auaso, aud
he egaacy 19 supposed to

enency have only baan prooonted to
porsan wus un
ney Soard hao uoually acted. owiftiy:

dor aotive: coneiderd-
“Goverhaont
to patition
ostion LU.

lot yet, necessary for CAS

gduce the nugdera who can de
% ere tho ryaugons for thio policy
step backward fron solving tho

tho nustera who cen vo helped

¢ that over 6,600 hava tovu racot~
warivua roaguus, including imeii-
It io true that tho pricary

Thin action, of ead
saber of porgone vho can be cutso-
loo the policy of tho Progres
grene vhivh dopord to a cor-
tsitudy ostoting in caigre olrcleo
zing thio partioular objootiva,

n ta deo
yr ordutnaole, aro of interact to U.S.

1a ta avcopt any Soviot citisan oo
ager dioodpt

Prograa gcoodplished for Sovict
,

9 based pricarily upon tha noola
he Frograa. ‘Yhoo9 noeda oz2 dotor=
usdor vhioh tha voluntery egenoies
2 bead case sorsor3 to tho fiold
doteraioa their particular noois,
Atioaz, end geavral cituaticas
davalop o epscifio

plen ose

ot; and tu-intesrate.-

Jaro oa oligible those porsona.

ine of the Soviet Govern=


--- Page 68 ---
14-0000

_ ahatributed in tha neighborteod of 319,000.

Bouse.in Huntoh with o capacity of 10 perscna, and the ol

-veperted, of of Noventor 15:

pe eoul

aithough the Escapee. gTaa Divieion
: oa. for Germany has codtracts vith both
: aPRP to cacry out o counselling progres fer
foxiuately $14,000 6m each agency
A t-Complotely counsollod -
ro. gage, “AGéordingly, 1% te poot-diffioult to eake any
yo1o of the agount of asgictacce rendered aa compared to the
artedt of ne: Gn Deceato> 7, representatives of both agencios wore
aivised by the Bscézee Prograa D fon, that ths cow! ling progres
past do completed in, tho near future, and that USEP efll be in @ such
datter position to evaluate the Frogran of aesiotance to Sovict escapade

Despite the efsittedly unpatiofactory oituation outlined {a the
Previous faragrapa, certain positive eotion hag, boon takon by the EPD
acd tho voluntary ‘agoncioa to provida asotataonce to Soviot escaped.
Roportodly, AFRP hae .diotridated ta tha ‘notghdorhood bf 815,000 to
oupplesontal daotetanco in tho fora of fod, oOlothing, lodging, Oto.,

to oscapoas rogistorel ia ‘their casesload. The Tolstoy Foundation hao
In-addition, threo spooial

the Priondohip
20) rin
Katsoreloutorn, with a capacity of 36 == doth sponsored by AEP, ond
the Toletoy hose in Karlefeld which “hac a capacity of 60 te 100. a
word about oaoh of tha following tastallattionasr

Rousing aid projecta havo been eotadiiohel in Goruanyr

@ho Priondohiy Houoe in Muaich to eaall and to alvays full. fbe
lossth of otay varics por individual ae ito primary purpose ‘Ya to furs.
nigh tenporary housing for Bissias.eacaress eho coaa to -Kunich looking
for vork. In Coss caceo these sariods of reaidenco have dregqgal oute
At thia Rono full care aad raratenanve t3 given, ao the residoata oro
nostly dnoligible for relte’ granta tn Eavarias

- Tha Kavlofold house tas spesed on Septeader § and bes eocepteld 26
gacapeaa to dato. In edditiaa to tha fast that aaoh eppliceat 1o
ecraoned by the eganoy oad than ty a ecasilote cad GSEP Toprasontativa,
the elaiosion process is ¢ licated by tho nocd to transfer uneaploy=
goat end rolfof besofita from other creas. Whilo thio tnotallation ta
not cocat to be 6 Keusing pV t of scai-peraanaat quartora, sho typ.
of afd mociod by cost pore pulestet vill probadly rocult 1a 0 foirly
atsdle populotion, coco tho hsae ia Zilist. Tha Kaioerosleutora hora

19 currest.resizasta

ll parcona coved to private quarters

} sorcona xaret to Labor Sarvice Unita.
10 persona ras si to fcrcer reaideaca
5 depondoate placal in jova

SEARRT ALE ane

wh



--- Page 69 ---
14-0000

"+ eould lotcte percaneat pillete. 7

“plua other do; ndonta , pasoed throvgh tho “conter
ancy fo Alitios there, (Dépontonte’ oxad ‘to
to Guortoro vore located.) Of" tho total,.
et cao tis or anothor,. lived in the
“this inatallation io net rogardod °

x waoing but waa erected solely to houso oocapoes teupor=
Grily fcr viva tobe had deen: founded who nooded quartere until. thoy
rofore, odcspece are roforre’ hore”
caly chet jeb opportunitios oxiot. eit otey. only until private housing
42 ona tioa,. oonziduratica vas Given to filling tho house

would te ruined by insoluable morale provieds end dy tho lacs of availe
adle opoce to coet quioaly enployaont roqutroaontos ”

whoust ag projeota*; end spars “frog
boustsg ta ths Coraan adonogy, inoteliationa for Gpacial perpoood voro
ooasideret t-1 thas9 thros oubosidise the bonefita dorived froa ©
the Priestchip House tn Wuhioh are Laing evaluated, cad 9121 bo dion
cuoscd at tho forthooulng eonforoncas” (Z}. the Kerlofold Youoo haa
vacastly teca vyonod onl filling it 13 boing dolayod by o rather cunder-—
OGas esreciing pruceod, but a process required’ to coos our security
Yozuirosesto end thea requirenente of tha Kanich Consulate Generals and
qs} tho Telcorsloutera livuse has toan rather effectively used, dbaing
linited ty tbe nuubora of job opportuaitiva. Until vo ard convinced,
hosovor, t full of alaoat full banofita aro boing dorivod froa those
hons3, [iP to reluctant to ootdblicd et4itional houoing projects of &
teaporary teture and it Ye ‘oontrary to GID? polloy to onter into long-
tora arrasgozents which sould be. Sntailod “in provioton of peruanent .
housing.

To eugcorics on tho quoation of

Purther, encapoen gonorally arg eligible for houping oithin the
Gorzan ezznosy. & soarch for this housing to cade caoag that oontrol-
led by tho Gennungoaat or io caraarsod in nov refugeo housing being
built. Esccycos ora doing inoludod in o now POA prograa of $15 aillioa
whioh fe currently boing digouoool by PO’ cad tho Gorean Fodoral
RBopudlic fees LEFTEL to Bonn US¥OTO 453, Doooaber 15, 1953. ).

Adsitiocally, 30 Soviet childron wore cent to Sut
rohadilitstion ard @ vacation for eight wooso laet suca
of $3,987. .

for ont for

(a) os cis How oany ox-Soviota have roootved what) avatotanoe
end how A for Cero & Maintonanco?
As printed out above, the incoazleta ent unoatiofoctory statua of
the cous fg projoote of the agoacier, plus. inesoquate or unavall=

prociuda tho poooibilities of detornining how casy Soviets
t agoistance and how such for Care & Maintenances ©

able flies
have recaived oh

However, ves

Zant potentialo, but“tha egasoy dcsurred for fear tha projoct .



--- Page 70 ---
14-0000

ty 94-1953, cable. - (Confidential)

‘to ore adviced that effective irsod Soviet dofectore

oinoe Jan 1, 1945 cay be conoidorad eligible for
coapiote progrea. egolatance.. Unites. obld cunzlete regiatration -
of thie group in each
Evory effort obhld be aode to orcato eaxicis progres 1apact oa

. Dov eocaveos in ‘each ‘areas “It 10 roalizod that extanaton of .
oligibility:to thio group say caugo cone roperoussica as0ng
otbor nationality groups and the agaico ‘guzporting thea. It ts
pointed out however that groat cajority Yov dafectors are
eligible undor proviuiono para 6 & 7 of Proviotonal Guide Pi.
Moroovor Unito ehid take all fodaible consures to ainiaise
raporousaions by exerctoing usvout diacreticn in ioplosentation
of thio inotruoction ovg. by digcusolng it prinarily only with
egcies intorestad in thio group.” my

Grea aad advine CFC of numbers registered.


--- Page 71 ---
14-00000

eS

Text of January 20, 1955, cable: (Confidential). «

“Soviot defectors reforrod to in Frankfurt te) sent Vienna 85, -
‘Rows 87, Athoria 102, Trieste $9, Letanbul 43, Gonsva 21 for :
. Carson ohld be generally. intorproted as those Sov citisens or .
“Sov Ukrsniano: who, left Wilitary of Govt garvico since Jan 1985, .
or their dopendonta (para 6 of Prev Guido Pl). Local Tnits say

oloo. ortond asoistance to ouch other poot Jon 1945-307 cecapece

who qualify undor Pera 7 of Cuide ¥1, excepting hard core OP's.

Gr persone who have been in refugee statue prior to World War II."

i
i
i

i
i
i
i
i



--- Page 72 ---
14-0000

Pext of inatructiona ‘teaued to atl field unite Deceubor 19538

_ . “Regardisae cf hie country of, origin, any Iron Curtain oscapee whos.
: duricg tha fericd 1945, to the present tine, wae voluntarily or forcibly
ropstriatod, but who proceeded ro furthor than the Eastorn Zonoa of |
-Gorzany cr Austria, snd‘vao datoined in tho Eaotern Zones of: Gersiany
or Avetria undor tho disoiplinu of tho Soviet ocoupation forces or vas.
enployed in an official, ooni-official, or any other capacity, rogord-
+. | Yoga of the nature of hio osploynent, by or for the Soviet “oooupation
H forced, and whd oudsoquontly defected, flod, eacapod, or othoruiae
returned to the Weat, for any reason, chould be conoidored eligible
for USEP agoistanco, provided he is otherwioe oligible.” .

Your attention 1o again directed to Section 7 of Ouido #l
chich euthorises you to rake exouptiona in any individual cao,
regardlcaa cf eligibility oriteria. . :



--- Page 73 ---
14-0000

‘
: . Siege varie ee wee wo tgets " a -
wee wee SECRET se b3GP. .

AL. aN * ROUTING ANG RECORD SHEET 3 yaw tiSe

RETESET: Citcer denn ane atov!d be Cs c
| Gnd each com man! aumbere: pon. carn
‘belore further routing The

ys

— Goa.
22) WD oa rd

eee a


--- Page 74 ---
14-0000

me ct : _reayy OVO !

ar? OiPATCH KO. =

TO : Chief FE (atthe Chfes §P)-

FROM: Cite! of Minston, Trankfurt

SUDHCT: encim— ALDSUN/AEP AD J
: © rece Asstatanca te Sovset Escasces Through USEP

‘

Rae EQUI

1. Ina recont conve pwith Mr. Pickard 2, Brown, OFCEP,
Franxiurt, iaorea! soveral portions of a lotter which ho had just
receivod from his Washington headquarter directing nom feirly.
strony atticion to tho German country unit dn {toa handling of tho
program, Usedlesa to oa, Brew wag ecnsidoradly upset since it
aspears that much of tho critician aterod fra3 KU: It waa hig
inpression that our convoraaticns of. last Novexbor and Dorenbor and
tho remodial action taka by OFC at that tina ralative to tho USEP
Gorman unit's handliny of tho Soviot progran had indicated bia villings
nasa to do anything posstole to correct defieL tog and to fore-
otal) gust such eriticta: In paxarraph 1 of
catod that ga‘isfacto; : §
In’ this connect{on wa 9 su an Attachtunt A a copy of Yroun's
written answora to owr anectfle vuastiona, |‘ CAttocliment B ig a eriterta
for USFP assistance.) . . .

Pe in werd te tha eritieton levelled at ®ram and tha dormnan

cunit by the Somers hone Leo, tha Collowing cert{nont-excorpte
wore pagsed to tha underateneds .

r At tho third reet
the ques!ion of the

“3 a great daal of gtresa wos laid on
ecial interest casey of othor Govarnnont,
even-loy. I wes a to doll at sone Lengt on tho opacicl
thal wel spoclal interest casda,. cad to
Ster and vergu of our ranert to the O23. Konathelesa,
elt that wa chovld very grvatly internally our ufforta
s kospocts Yt ‘a cloarty ccastéarad tray tho dispesal
sy ona very toh priority Varrents
J oxponse on the pest of tha Procrea,
‘%%) attcch very proat- ortenca to tia, end
as exmrvsued whl tha nonnor in wialeh tho
ay inplovantad ‘wv tha Presre1, In
felt that tho Preorca hes boon
or ita ceatrocters with eeseo which
perudle Jirfieultios in cennection with the



--- Page 75 ---
14-0000

fly

2a Mowe
Seer) Seeney

Gasiza to cee!

8 ener

tev e

nd athes srang through
of arrancin: diss -
tint y

2 eT Aint one
2 effect tymnans 5

pLaes ous ons -79
r

testi ae
o “ee:

ene
frkt et

eotyy

fant report to
country v

turred ¢om,
the secarees

ation ew
anal
sy ae tee™

Berllne
ploriatde snd ry

ped iy" Brot ail o tie
a abow relating to diplomatic and militar c
neous and this anfutation ta verne.ct cer oa invuge
2 tha nagt, elighbllity was withheld fren cortsin
voluntary: Neatriates"® whe had in fact, sot no furtzer than Ain
on tha trek back toa the UISR wo Intoy returned to Vogt Cemany.
Hovewr, we cre assured that tiia iz no lonper necossart}y tng and
that ager case is dudead individ

tore ig

ae

i nat ly, the dorran ‘issten fenla that Hrounts flat atate~
yor all assistance. can lo “randene ‘to Bry .cucamme witha

ve
“e@ opinion that YSEP fs making a sincery and
enorgucie effort to carry outa ent task, Wo hava no cans
plaints at the present tr az to linc of that cart of tho
progres which touches KUBARK. intorsta. It will oe enereciated if
this can te nade clear by tho Kh

that the rbd 4s now of

with the Escapaa Progra in Washinrtone . a

Diote

ufo att

hat the final~



--- Page 76 ---
14-0000

aaracn By

. 7 :
. oo a . . . : fi 5 om
RESTRICTED SECURIT INPOMATICS . { .

5 JFROVISICRAL GUIDZ HO. Lb | ily 17, 1952"
— i. CRITERIA FoR HUCRITY ASSISTANCE MDE ESAS P CORAM ;

’ . :

‘%. Tho mie Sucurity Act of 1951 provides tio basic lextalativo |
authority for. tha Escapo Fregron and ‘thus establishes the elementary cri--
teria fer oxtonting aasistcncee . cee

: Socticn 191 (a){1)'cf that Act cuthorizes tha expenditure of a out
not to excocd $100,000,Q0) 8for eny celectcd porrcns tho aru resiJing. in or

-  ggeapses fraa-tho Soviet Urlea, Folend, Cxcchoslovaxta, Howary, Kueanka,

: Bulgaria, Albania, Litheanta, Latvia and Estcniay er tua Com fot doaainatod
er Casstilst occupied areas of Goreay end Avotria, cad Cy ethes countries
ebsorbcd ty tha Soviet Uaica either to fora cuch p:racna ints elessnts cf”
the cllitary forces ouppor wy the North htlantic Treaty Crgsnication or
for cthor purposes, wher it is oiadlarly coterainc Ly the iresicont that
such essiotanco will. contribute to tho, dofenso of the North Atlontle crea
and to the security of tie United Statcs*. | rn .

2. Cfficlala carrying oub this progroa ghouid not becca involved in
a coaples, tine-ccnaualiy procedurca in dotormmin:ng pelority for assistance.
‘Ib da expoctud that a positive cpproach taiand priority wi:l do teken and
. thet criteria will reatin a3 sisple and brecd as is censtotent with Usd.
interests. It follows that aid should bs given draodistely to porvoens who
efparently acel tho priority critoria outlined toloy and should bo withdram
caly if reasonablo evidence id broucht forvarnd which :ndicates tut the
porsca docs not avot these criterias

3. Tho intont and purpose of thy prograa is to ald new escapcos from
escunist opprosaion, “hatovor the worits of aiding persons whe wore dia~
plecad before, duruiy, or sovn after ‘Merld jar TI, cuch ald to act nemally
a proper concom of this yregran, Lorcover, quite apirt fro uy other con=
eLlorations, tlia prograa ‘docs not hava sufficient fuirts to acuiut muy
foramy ether than thosa who have recently eecacd fren ' ghinl the Trea
Curtain. In tho forcgoing perspective, tho follesing criteria mii) be ubili-
god by tho Uissions in according priority for assistance.

_ be Priority for agsistance in resottlecent crt for eupplam.atary care
wlli te prented any yoruen who oacaped aftor Juauary 1, 16:0 frar the Usa,
Polos, Lityia, Lithuznia, Estonia, Czoc.calovakia, Hungery, Rimania,
Bulgeria or Albuniac .

S. Within the trocd confines of the cbove, thare will boa certain
pergona whoa tha Unitad Statca cbviously will not ccoire ty eosist avd there
Will bo otliary whozo otatuy in their country of residence efter flight 1a
such that thoy possess tho rights cnd coligstions of noticnility cf tho
cowitry in which they have takap asylwi. w : “* ° .

Lt )
ee

RESTRICTED SECURITY DON AT 20M



--- Page 77 ---
14-0000

: ROSTRITES SfS ATTY BY /
: “AROVDION, GUEE Now T (cons) .

YR FRIGRITY JES IST NCE. ORE .F !

Aaotstance wilh Aha be ceniod to or wittdron fro ay person whos

B. Is a fozcer Nach or Maat cetlad
srines comitted, Word war I boas
sonnel o> ageinat civil populations.

Dimers setae

canes

ably refused retatt:

sd ty tho campotont auth
“ha resigea.a2 having tho rignta and os
tha possession of citizenship of that co
end oxrelives, persons of Turkloh othnt:
Bulgarisgase excluded from asyistance unter w
fiag bea: satiofuatorily oottled lesally.

ry in ‘wtiteh
&ru attached'to
worm refugees: *

F

3 otheiwisa
a diplonutic,
¢ abroad in

G. Assistance wlll bo oxtendad, norovery, te these 2
oligiblo udes tha grovisiona of thiga circular whe dele
othor official ev sest-offictal missicna or pF dosegatin: 33
the sorvico of thoir country. ~

regamlose of
yp when ouch

ting in m=

tderod by

r to final

Te Missions srw aubhoriegd to muxo individual except
datolino, “yhion sz axcoptions are fi tho interes?
exceptions are rey d by other U.S. Gevern
lated fiolda. ©. uostod excapticna are story 2
tha Country Unit they aust be refurruc.te tho Special Unt
action.

6, A fenily grow? containing 8 person of purser who would not ordinarily
bo ceatoted dua ts nagdonality, Oey. Pollen oscazea ant Austricon spouse and
who aro othorwisa eligible ghouid be considered eligible as a uit.

ee

9. Rasiec res: flity for dotomminutica of elict
tho Local Units. Ecwevor, it ie oxpectad that they wil
moang of utilising: le al rocilities und cffictls to a’nax:
enor to csaist Local Unit di discharging this reaps.
ovont tho local wt requires furthor ssaistange in ma
dooiasion, tho Special Unit may bo called upon by the Los
gation or advices : .

will reat with
waya ond
axtunt in

ys In tho
Ligtbility
for infore

aa

RESTRICTED

cinemas famines eee tee

seth oR Se orto Dat ra

‘eather


--- Page 78 ---
14-0000

_ RESIRICTED = SECUIGTY ixFRMATION

MicRoriLMCD

nomic!

| fae 51965- : AbDSIDU . :
L

” FROVISIOKAL GUIDE KC. 1

“CRITERIA FOR INTOZITT 1137.

> UIDER ESCATES PROGRAM

‘

“Tort of tolo-conforonce recoived froa Dopartzont July lk, 1952
_in-erplification of eritoria outlined undor Provisional Guidd gs

SFEP Frogroa to concerned with oocapoos from Soviot- or Soviot

ot ar eo en nes,

doninated aroaye. In viuw fact FEP funda aro liattod and tocausu of
legislative hiotery of progran Friority er proforenco’ nusd te givon

. OR OR TE ON Sa eT ED OF ST, - oe

to coro rocont uscapoos ouch ua thous who oscoped after January 1,
* - I9L8G Declofons’as to applicution of fund gust aloo bo based cn

resulta which can bo achieved in turns of baato obdjuotives of prograts

InQther words wo aro not distributing a linited sulief fund oqually
anong'a dootgnated number of poopje. Wo aro more concorned with
thoco who have escaped eccrg recontly than those who havo boon in the
rofugoo otate ainey World War I or theso who wore uprooted botwcon
Sopterbor 1939 om! January 1, 1948. Tho data January 1, 1948 {3 an
adzintotrativo duvico which ohculd not to rigidly applied unicos
inter exhaustion of funds increasingly requires this aotion. Of ;
equal concorn to JEP ove thu rusults which can bo achioved tn teres
‘ ’ of rosoteblichwnt, rogattlocant, bettur corale, otae, a9 botwaon
ona Frojeot and another, Mo obould ask eolf-Liquidating, non
repotitive usoa for FEP funds.’ Avoid to tho extont ‘posaiblo
necoptanoe of responsibilities wnich cannot roadily bo rolinquiohsds
As experience dovolopa w etal ecko the foregoing rcro caloctive’



--- Page 79 ---
14-0000

ah.

i

a

i

?

{ Erovirdenal Galde Ke. I. (Sost)

i ro? PHT TY ASSIST

h

{

i rapa & of unnunborod paracrap following paragraph five

f

5

i. ;
H

i

}

Of Provinional ‘iuide tic. 1 ta amendad to read:

"E. Ia rucocnired by the cazpetent authorities of the country in

which ba rositea or other country cutside of tho arca of

Toviut deitaction as having the richsa ard obligations which

ara attachod to tho possession or cdtcecnship of that country

eg- Geman resugeos tnd expell:oy, porzena of ‘Turldiah uthnic

origin fru adamant and Gulgaria are eccluded from.agsiatance

under tala parajraph.®



--- Page 80 ---
14-0000

- SECRET.

DP SU ICAL

esta cm onan natant os

#2 Jacket contains niscellsneous corres;ondence for 1949-19;

. #3 jacket contains reports & Pro:ess Sheets for 1y50= -

teh lates te drew aoe mente


--- Page 81 ---
rapoo0o

SECRET

fines Killed fa) -

DOMESTIC CONTACT SEZVICE - ORGANIZATION INFORMATION SHEET

Sn
Af Companent Indicate alee the Nowe and Addrene Gf the Parent Orgone

Se SSo¥ OF

To Newa anc asneess oF ce
bateons

International Rescue Committee, Inc-
S86 Park Avenue a :
‘New YOrk, New York

BT. ASST veee Perera cowracts, THEr@ POStTISNS. cEenEE OF COOREMATION, SECUNITY STATUS. ETC.
charles Sternberg, Executive Director, very cooperative: Subject is in charge of the New.
: York Office, Stermterg was Approved/SECRET in May 1971. (WwW. Freund of
: the NY Office has min touch with subject: for many years.)

Leo Cherne, Chairman, -We have been ouch with Leo Cherne, but not in regard to IRC.
: : ~ . Cherne i's’ Execut irector of -the Research Institute of America, Inc.,
“. $89 Fifth Avenue,’ New York, and was placed in Approved catégory in

June} : noo . = - oo we

nts very coccerative, Approved/SECRET. She has provided valuable
FPI regarding deveicpments in Bangladesh where IRC is actively involved in
‘Telief operations. : . ; so

[] CONTINUCO ON REVCOSE

CLUDE THE TYPE OF BUSINESS Cealon, Reseach
TT INVOLVES. AND ANY RESTRIC aS
y toward our misaion eetabdlished within the

Sinan i2G VOUS ESTIMATE OF THE VALUE OF THE ORGANiza>LON AS A SOURCE OF FP),
ete.) ORICH THE ORGANIZATION 1S ENGAGEO. INE SifctzT ano COUNTREES for Ar
ENCOUNTERED wiTm GEGARD TO ACCESS To SOURCES fe.g.. Tr.augh what method Je p st
Organization) 6 7

This organization is not a source of EPI. It helps new immigrants to settle in.the
.US, It is of value to us by helping ‘us to locate East European and Soviet immigrants
wanted for debriefing. co . . : -

[] CONTINUED ON MeveERsE

 RECEPTUVITY TO CPEMATIONAL RECUIREMENTS, LEST ANY 1aScudecinG Factors (Restcictions, Policies, etc.)

Sternberg is likely to be Teceptive ta operational requirements, but may not: have the
authority to comit the organization, . oo

Mrs. Lord would probably be receptive to any reasonable operational requirements
which would not jeopardize IRC's good name everseas. ‘She has already been accused in
"Communist New Age" of being a CIA operative. . :

| (el omar

SECRET

[] CONTINUED OM REVERSE
[eve
30 May 1973

|

FICLO OFFICE NYEQ ALO

om 94824

12-07


--- Page 82 ---
14-00000

SECRET

- (uden Fitted Tar”

+ MAME ano A00RE3S OF oeceni zation ite
sation)

International Rescue Committee Tne.
306 Park Avenue

ew York, Kew York ee Ss s é 7s

AE OF COOPERATION, SECURITY rors ere.

ae -
ry ar Cowponrat Endre ate aloo ine Nase and Address of the Porent Organi-

Fa. LUST vOUR PRINCIPAL CONTACTS. "THEIR POSUTIONS.

—— “.. Charles Sternberg, Chief of Office in New York": i) S 702 7

- Very cooperative.
Approved SECRET in May 1971.

(Walter Freund of the New York office has been a | Long*time contact of. charles Sternberg. )

C] CONTINUED on REVERSE ©
. (SuMMARIZE your ESTIMATE OF THC VALUE OF TRE ORGANIZATION AS A SOUNCE OF FRI. INCLUOE THE TYPE OF BUSINESS (
Dorm wHIch THE ORGANSZATION 1S ENGAGED. Tet SUIJECY AND COUNTRIES (or Areas) IT thvOLv! AND ANY RESTR
UNTEDED WITH REGARD TO ACCESS TO SOURCES (e.g., Through what method is polsey toward o iseton eatab.
sation) : ~
ano The Organization has no value as a source of FPI. It helps néw immigrants to settle
in the U.S. . ee :
It is of value to us by helping us to locate East European immigrants wanted for
debriefing. . a , : LL

[] CONTINUED ON REVERSE

eed.

RECEPTIVITY TO OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS. LIST ANY INFLUENCING FACTORS (Reetrictions, Policies,

Sternberg is likely to be receptive to operational requirements, but may not have
oe the authority to commit the organization. ,

[] CONTINUED ON REVERSE

FIELD OFFICE Hew York Wie x. Graber /evk

SECRET


--- Page 83 ---
14-0000 a

eee ee a

—

Chi et. New York Office 4 Auguse 196 ¥ -

oo Rew ew Case Rar
: Ct Zari bor

_ Me Curberte Sonas = es)

er rene Ee

ope

Peete ent Paced Et na

5S6Y

sp ped BAB TI


--- Page 84 ---
14-0000

Re ES
DE ESE 184 artiste?
R 2atsnez ZER

aT :

XXXXX ZEA “ “ ;
- ZERO SIX FOUR NYC? / ce

ET ToT darseez

een vA 6144
(woe

eon ALTEN RRANCH CSIVESS)
ae

SUBJECTS CASE a161d - JAROSLAV KREMELY/_

arma aed

le CASE NUMBER ates MAS SEEN ASSIGNED TO THIS CASE. -

i
:
H
|
| 2. NAGLE WAS MET AT AN ARRANGED: RENDEZVOUS WITH NO INCIDENT
AND ‘SUBJECT WAS SUBSEQUENTLY TRANSPORTED TO OU FACILITY,-

| 3. ARRANGEMENTS ARE UNDERYAY FOR sumJEct To INDERGO a. TORO
GOING OVER, NE APPEARS PLEASANT AND OFFERS. COOPERATION, SO AT THE
i

MOMENT NO DIFFICULTIFS ARE ANTICIPATEN - 4
ye TSS

26

Ss ¥E OULD APPRECIATE THE 10S TRANSCRIPT AT THE EARLIEST.
Se
POSSIBLE TIME, ;
i 3e VE CANVOT VENTURE A DEPARTURE DATE, PLEASE ADVISE IF THERE
| IS NEED FOR HIS PRESENCE IN MEY YORK AT ANY PARTICULAR TIME,
6. THE INTERESTED PEOPLE HAVE REEN THFORMED THAT SURJECT TS
HERE, TEMPORARILY, AND THAT TE DUE COURSE. YE ¥ILL RE SETUPNED To uts

iP .
| SPONSORS, THE we 6 SSCS

Te wr OULD CAPFREC TATE ANY PEQTINENT FATE cove TERVING. SURJECT,

agko

sf, : :
ik RF Tita besa Wy
CFN 61404 SIVESS.-a1619> “Jane SLAY KREMEL 41619 - NAGLE NOT INCIDENT A

THORO NO DIFRICULTIES Tras, caumat VENTURE A NEV YOR* TRO

‘ ‘ ae

le,


--- Page 85 ---
14-0000

_ foe
: . Te aA LZ :
. La wt }
oo i
rd ; 4
. va 1
. ;
ipp res
4

of ga tea ode ansy

Poyposay ze

DAW TATA o3p9se?

PUTTY:

aie espirety! pant Fes

CAST AL,E1D ~

“To Tavey ay AYP TRU AL POPLATEESTEDND »

Sy. open suan

LEIND PITEIPACTER cap are (nat 275 SMP sept cep fates

2.0 DR. JAM TLAY MEEMEL, NAM AS APITL LIH TI OSTTAVA,

CEECHBALAVAKTAT WIPE QC PVA MEE PrODUTRAYAR MATRITR 23 GNLY 19553

UQETSS, Pets YOARS, g. FATHED. COLUTICT), Je. Lesunir

aye :
S@ESeLg voTHE® wage ore YUMA ALL REGIIIEA OnToaya, ,

TORY TTA O27, TESTES, TTL TTY MATILDA, CANE apDETes,

WE PSL ATE Py PREF vein, ae .

“3 AT MAEPETAL OF STEEL AMT read coetay veers, '

VAS QUITE AUTSTUTT TST, Ha 00 STAFFS LAAus piotonet x

ANESTUESTA VeRn, VHETHET TE aeperecen aeutecLaay, vase aem _

, 1 sok

THOT, OP OTHE, ANTSTHT STA NIT 9 HELL HevrLo[ra

CPECUISLOUAN EG 45 My tuy OFTEY ADITITETELED MY wuREr | =
RATNER? Tugs tea, TOA SPATE SYATNATION Is SEEaray STATE

ca

FXSM TUSTIN 1G AMECTYE STA SENET APY 1959,  AFTEP Cros Teng

APQVEE MANICTIE AT MMADLES UVTUSEN TTY POST, BAe CITY USER TTA

OSTRAIA NO, LAT INTENT 1991099, CAVE TO PLANT MOSPITAL 1952,

wyres. Ne

ESS RAT, TIMAECY OF FIPST DENIES [oSK]58y

zg a MWVESTUTAKCT AT SeAAWN ACFE TE SET EN C08



--- Page 86 ---
14-0000

oyperraayrg 82 7

; vps ;
wat ade 4 ‘ tps SOENy?

Let

APY tee: seevebpeg qe gere rere catty

a, gepreer opp

reyes ee UENCE, .

cote grtacnee sy ores

aL

VU ere Sp ete

CQCTN eer cep ag interment: corsets

JUSS epee pee a

sper sorry mh

spre esp ues ‘am, ratte tap aw COSTIRGS GULF |

YY ooyeimirety, Te

PAS SOR

A TTRAUA, DP TAATE .

woey age raven, erties 1 JETER.

APPInAE TE semper og ds wou
roe

ra tersay ten Paae

MseaT PS Spec et, Siw VSN Tay Ye

— \

CEEOND ANOUT POAT, AIOMIZOT WAC ES TENILY TTY Reg Tyee oF DANES “HORE

14 ew COTM, IISTENOTOR AF TLAvOU IS LITEMATESE at

yesys, WH Tetaaateh sare eereetLy.  vOTIVATTOY
ereen

LATED AD PAVED TAQY DARNMELS TETIOLIGNT, | FETLIST

see eee
PAR PERSIST ION

TUYVAED TARTS Y QT Peeparyne 7 ANY SAY,

SMTOOLY Tay ¢

LY PSEEIN FaCkgeaein,

x”

cays ryerr par

CO PIETY weet ose atures rome ap aya savachey waren’

YEN UNSRATOLP YER NAT OPES NR FACQUL AU KASSEL SR OACIN EN2€

Rays QVOUEE PEDRO TIA 2S GLY ENES Pets MP LIDUT NREL

:
Bea seer xoyy

BADTR NEE yoory ceTeaya B94}
.
By AMDress SO SeLAT TEES WETNAYIOe 1d STARR OUST Mo eM > 1956

SPAS tAPY PAS) Nach

SUMIVEPSETY POSE UAL PE POS TATT 1952 1996259

PSO NTIET co TAT Quester rer Tey ets MEN yoay STTER DANES

PL Teruevy cry cLAVaNIe

Tet PRINT?



--- Page 87 ---
14-0000

n

Heroriadun 7 June 64

least office of the IANS requeated the Fila of

Bras. Chu frea tc oston Gift Thin revealed the previously varce

Ceats hustand dled in Hen, Fc in’ Lata

vaur of the Pin Chong Food Cospany, Tred

t Mog. Chu had come to the Uscunces the curs

i ic Cequai tus and wes bainp sperisered |

5yNa Einemdron yal tas Texas. |
~—

where te had worked a
Pile further ravested

Ais was contacted at 4921 ‘Travis Strece ahare aba
da Living with foe 2 six children. 310 correborated mich of tra infers
nation contains: ta bor (nS file and advived that she way net in
contact. sfth ‘on the mainland of China Lut ec lenaliy heard
froa trieris ! She is looking for work and heres to fine
a jebas aw: ssttly a filing eller’, Cho stated that she
hed left the eriniasad in 1949 and had no recent inforreticn on condiq
her ‘potential ay ad metresvly

roe auestioned an the checklist des cod it fn
thts cao ba loved.

Lfattes,
socgnatrd

J. wanton roe



--- Page 88 ---
14-00000

YEYXY YEA ot
SEOv RT TES paren?
WA CITE SYGP B7as - i Oe
UTR eT (STUNTS) FROM ELLIFF , ae x
ePOU CHE EYCLUDED TROw ayn: MATIC POUNG RATING AND. PECLAT IF ICAT IGN

y
fowace “rps

CASE 38650 VILLIA
$60 SE SPOVR ARIFFLY “ITH WeppTs on "0
SEVERAL TRIPS TO CUBA, THE LATEST IN Jax ‘ARY_1963 For Two Weeuse HE

AY 3 APRIL. HE MAS

VISITED PRES“YTERIAN CHUNCHES THRCY CHOUT THE. COUNTPY WITH THE ENDEPTION
(7 THE AREA WEST OF MAVANA, HIS OFFICIAL TITLE 1s DIRECTOR, |

VE SPANO-AMERICAN DEPARTHENT , QOARD CF MAT TONAL NISSTONS THE PRESOETRIAN

tone IN CUDA 13 ADMINISTRATIVELY A PART OF THE NEY JERSEY PRESOYTERY),
YE TOLD US THAT HE HAD COMPLETE FRiFDON OF MOVEMENT , ENC OUNT EF £D NO
DIFFICULTY ARYEMERE AND WAS nEvEE STOPPED OR DUESTICNED 2Y TYE AuTHoRI~
TIES. 4E SAID NE WAS OFTEN TAvEN FoR A SOVIET OR EASTERN EUROFEAN,
MOPAPLY RECAUSE NO ONE EYPECTER TO SEZ AM ARERICAN, .

a, WIS PLANS FOR FUTURE VISITS TO CURA ARE A eit INDEFINITE HE

, OULD LIVE To MAYE THE NEYT vIs IT WITH SEVE! ERAL CTHER CHURCHMEN FROM

CTHER DENONTA XAT TONS 5 THERE Is CN INTERPENOMINATIONAL SEMINARY AT
MATANZAS, WHICH HAS MANY PROOLEMS THAT NEEL TO Qf PIs SCUSS EDs THE SEMIN
APY VOULD PLAN A 30ARD MEETING TO COINCIDE WITH THE VISIT CF THESE
get WHO ARE ON THE soanD, THE GROUP zB. woubn {0 INCLUDE? ne,

‘9% STOCUVELL (METHODIST) BISNOP JOUR AENTLEY CEPISCOPAL Dy DH, “Larisa

AA

@AFTIST > AND DR JOM 4 SINCLAIR CPEESAYTERTAN), THE ONLY MIMQER OF
TIS cROUP ¥YNOVN TO US IS 3ISHop BENTLEY GHO HAS SEEN AN CYTREMELY
COCFEPATIVE CONTACT OF THIS OFFICE, THIS TRIP NCPEFULLY WILL TAKE

FACE IN THE PEAR FUTURE BUT THERE ARE ENO DEFINITE PLANS AT ‘THIS Jive.

Se HAPRIS MAD A PROBLEN WH ne “THOL VE MisHT: BE ADLE TO AELP vITH.
THF CENERAL ASSEMOLY OF THE UNITED’ ‘Me tsrcceaan OMInCH 12 TO TaVEe



--- Page 89 ---
14-0000

CROANTPATION IN : CAPDENAS; ALSO DR, PENE rARRLLANo®, ‘A LAYMAN FRO . i
CARDENAS’ AWD A FORMER UNIVERSITY PROFESSOR, =) ° . Lok

frtn OUR INTERESTS CHILE AT THE SAME TINE “WANTING TO BE, ASSURED. THAT

: TASTS IN FACT FOR THIS ASSUMPT iON HIS US EFULNESS WOULD BE at AN ENDs

-WOULD TURN DON ANY REQUEST TO MELP DURING NIS. NExT TRIP SINCE IT

MOQGET, [ObA fram phe

THE BPLECATES PON Cuca ATTEND, AIT

SETTING THE NECESSACY PAPERG, THE ott reruity Shes TO AE FoR THE

DELECATES TO CPT THES A CHANCE THAT THE

us EMDASSY THESE VILL CRANT THEM PRR MISSION Te CORE Ite TME COUNTRY.

TENANTS OF THE PROPOSED DELE ATFS APE SERS Ie! ANEJIAS, PA: OTOR oF THE
CHURCH IN CARDENAS, AND HES vIFE, PRES IDENT or THE! FRECOYT ERAN worenrs
\ .

: t

\ i

‘ H

. : i

!
fe ON THE BASIS OF CUR RATHER SHORT VISIT VE CANNOT MARE MUCH OF : if |
i

a ASSESSMENT OF HARRIS, HE WAS EYTREKELY CORDIAL, ENTIRELY sympatner ie!

\
HIS CONTACT WITH US. WOULD NOT BECOME IOUNS HE SAID THAT NATURALLY MANY
FEOFLE ASSUMED HE WAS CONNECTED WITH THE CIA BUT THAT IF THERE WERE ANY

THIS VOULD LEAD US TO THINY THAT HE WOULD Nort HE WILLING To DO ANYTHING
CH OUR DEMALF Dup ine FUTURE TRIFS TO CUBA. WE ALSO THINK, HOWEVER, ; 4 :
THAT HE Y3 ENOUTH OF A REALIST THAT HE WOULD NOT BE UNDULY UPSET av THE
RESUEST AND THAT HE VOULD GIVE IT SERIOUS CONSIDERATION, WHETHER HE

{

|

vOULD aE MORE AMENABLE IF SOMETHING CCULL BE DONE T.0 ENASLE THE CUBANS i
PYENTIONED APOE TO COME TO DES MOINES, WE DON'T KNOW, UE THINK HE |
i

1

OULD “BE MADE IN THE COMPANY GF OTHER CHURCH PEOPLE.
Se WE VOULD LIKE TO MAKE AN APPOINTHENT TO TALK WITH MARAIS AT GREAT
LENCT He OULD you IVE US ANY IDEA oF HAT THE ‘Poss IDILITIES ARE OF

, KELP IN: wis cunan FRIENDS “AND VE COULD THEN TRABSUAT THAT INFORMATION

TO Hit aT THAT TIME, THANY YOU.

SECRET

aN NYOR 2748 STUNT? Spire 39654 VILLIAM DONALD HARRIS
8 AFRIL JANUARY 193 nF Rona gacrey RISPARC*AMERICAN DEPART = 7
MENT, 20ARD OF aur omtbvrsstony, "a JERGEY FRESAYTEBY NO NITFICULTY

NEVEP STOFFED A SCPSET EASTERN EU OPER NO ONE A INUEPINITE, KE.

MATAN7AS ADR, STCCXVELL. METWODEST JQMN RENTLEY CZRITSCPAL) OR.

EAKSEN (SAFTIST) DR. JCHN STNOLATP agg ees i) BENTLEY NO DEFINITE

MARPIS A SENERAL ASSEMALY DES tenes ter S 19 a oMAY METICN TITY

HARP BS MONDAY


--- Page 90 ---
14-0000 ca

GoRDENTIM.

eo: : . sy ,
can ue .
a . Citet, me Tork Pisla Cfiies Sg Rea: 1983

. . a - te - , se
acs, » Contest Pivisiea (22, a? ae) ° :

. C)
. : de Swiises ene 2 ia epensd fost tho ex
ley ea Teta FA enlace: 2, '
_ ! :
9 2ha Wed as woe ad
a, tha Re
i . +
: . . ry hans pflyen epee
{0 goa Ponagieco O24 Evy Tere Ch! :
: fasmeldy vsberata 03 8 eiasy
. in {rs York City dy lin ra Pf oublicies of
: -  eerathe .

me : kh. ba bavo eubettied emechects end amprati ll.)
¢ forsanied ehon soestred frou cscurisys

mee ORF 7g

ng tho Checks tes for indent i

Be He ASHCAATE

Batsd

Dintrination: ;
- : orig & L = Addresses
‘ . it cas
- rx/? Chreno
t + Inox
te Ve ule



--- Page 91 ---
14-0000

CIN YA 33382 MAJOR TRAVIS 37473 REUR NYOR 6269 SWEDISH

YYXYN TEA
96 NYOR
EGR rT
hWOR.CITE WA: 55382 , ’
_ os
MAJOR FROM SUFPORT (TRAVIS)

CASE STATS ; , a6 6o 74 .

aes tM

—_—
. THE SWEDISH DESY WOULD VERY MUCH LIKE TO HAVE. “RLOGRAPHIC DATA .

a BARBARA LISINSEI THe SWEDISH. CIRL WHO WILL BE IN CHARGE Or THE .
wom SES

. Rianne
Be CFFICE IN STOCKHOLM.

COULD YOU PLEASE OBTAIN FROM ine AS THE STATION MAY BE INTERESTED
IN ESTABLISHING ‘CONTACT WITH HER, THANKS VERY MUCH.

SECRET
BARBARA LISINSKE
Wc STOCYHOLM IRC | ,

To

1314352

i


--- Page 92 ---
14-00000

“yuxex 7EA

go6 NYOR
SECRET ne a
pron CITE VA 35982 a moe ced
“wagon FROM SUPPORT CTRAVIS? &
. ia 7
‘of
me

REUR NYOR 6e69 AND psfrRNaTIO“AL RESCUE COMMITTEES:
TRE SY EDISH DESY WOULD VERY ° MUCH LIKE To HAVE BICGRAPHIC. | pata
Gy BARBARA LISINSKL, tee SWEDISH GIRL YNO WILL BE IN CHARGE OF THE
IRC OFFICE IN STCCKHOLHS ~
~ counp You PLEASE OBTAIN FROM IRC AS THE STATION MAY: BE INTERESTED
IN ESTABLISHING CONTACT ¥ “QITH HERe THANKS VERY MUCH. oS
secRET | ;
GEN WA 33582 MAJOR sqpavIS STATS REUR nyor 6269 SHEDISH BARSARA LISINSXI
Be STOCHHOLN ERE > :
at .
13718357



--- Page 93 ---
14-0000

yxrxyy TEA

SECRET
; _ .
“A CITE NYOR S81
““ANFFORT “TPAVIS) FROM MAJOR — De =
CASE ates . eee, : oS
ginJECT © IRC REPRESENTATIVE IN SVEDEN hyd Se FEC _
EQMANENT RESEDENT

INTERNAT ONAL RESCUE COMMITTEE pees NOT NAVE a P
wa

PEPRESENTAT IVE "EIN SUEDEN. DRe RADE, WORACEX” Aas REPRES VENTED ‘wen Sera
FOR THE FAST YEAR AND A HALF nuT DCES NOT LIVE THERE. AND TRAVELS “hy
“at AS REUIREDs THE DR. 13 A FORMER JUGOSLAV, BHO HAT ny “PHD FROM.

“ONE OF TRE win -WESTERN UNIVER: SITIES. WE ARE ORTAINING FURTHER alo

INFORMATION AND WILL FORVARD« SINCE HE HAS. BEEN REPRESENTING irc FOR

“THE PAST YEAR AND A HALF KE 1S FAR FRO
IF OTHI3 1S THE R RICHT PERSON. our CONTACT AT IRC KNO'S

NEW. WILL YOU FLEASE ADVISE
3 OF NO CHANSE TO
TAVE PLACE. PLEASE ADVISE. 7

“SECRET
“GEN RYOR 38C1 GRAY Igayyragon s7A7s HSC SyEDEN INTERNATIONAL RESCUE
aus .

commit KOT HAYA A DRe RADE KORACEY,A, NOT LIVE DR, A JUGCSLAY PuD
nI0 Ne A IRC NO CHAE 7X BR

—_—"
eegnnt.
c sua of

—_—

_

eel

—_


--- Page 94 ---
14-0000

Sei
Looe: co . ASE ,
i VA CITE SYOR A632 Ut
\ qurronT (CONNELL) FROM MAJOR. yo! ey? Sw
! . - - . Ae , a) ft
7 ae aaod ra on
CASE 28972 7 e972 ; ho wee 5 ee
i : See . . ' ” . a :
| Js OoER/
\ SIASECT * MAREK HLASKO ¥ MAREK MLASKO TRIP SPONSORED IY INTERNATIONAL
4

RESCUE COMMITT LE.

cat Sf y be feted, . rae

THROUGH MRe Sanus STERNSER? ¥ CHARLES STTPRSERS or Inc ¥ ‘gRO VE

HAVE LEARNED THAT THE may HO WILL MAVE Host TO pC VITH SUBIET Lyf ,

WHILE HE 1S IN THIS COUNTRY 15 THE GECRETARY, A Ro MCALLISTER 7, -

MCALLISTER suavectT WILL KoT X NOT BE ARRIVENS THIS “COUNTRY “AZ: ‘PLANNED =

“SINCE NE HAS aEEN ILL IN BERLIN |Y BERLIN. HE WILL NOT ¥ “NOT “ATTEND

THE DINNER ON 75 NOV ¥ 75 ney ARD IF HE DOES COME, AND THIS HAS NOT ¥

NOT BEEN FIRMED UP, HE SILL aE comtne SOMET It
“JAKUARY 35 FOR THE OPENING OF THE FILM ‘BASED ON ONE CF HIS BOOKS»

4g In JANUARY 59 ¥ t

BiDIRECTLY & VE RAVE LEAK NEP THAT. THERE MAY BE SOME AYESTION

AS TO UHETHER THE FILM WILL ACTUALLY ol STRIBUTED Ww THIS COUNTRY ON

IP. EVIDENTLY 17 18 LOADED viTH rncTIc1ss TO THE
ME A SUNDAY SCHOCL PICNIC.

CCOUNT OF CENSCRSH
POINT VHERE A 72 FILMY Y 98 Fiiy wouLn Leow Lt

FILE = INTESNAT LOR AL RESCUE COMMITTEE

PED Cat thee LJ

\ Sad ; € oo wat ee d


--- Page 95 ---
14-00000

COMING TO THE us x eS oN Ba vis
SG}
. ISTERNATIONAL RESCUE cOMMITT £ ™ =

HOR CITE UA 3768 . , L ;
. . . . . . 7 va
. , - * iad
x : . oe
_ FROM SUPPORT (CONNELL) oo afk.
. . : et Fy .
. . ) .
. . ao
31 os 2 read os
THIS IS NEV CASE 28972 ¥ 2as72 eg S x)
a B=

POLISH DESY IS FEQUESTOR CF FCLLOVING: HAREK HLASKO ¥ MAREX yf

WLASKO THE FOLISH POET VHO DEFECTED TO VEST CERMAKY LAST SPRING TS =

ITORS VISA AT THE INVITATION CF THE |
O ATTND AN IRC Y IRC DINNER CN 29

x 3 ‘Nove IT 1s NoT X NOT “NOWN HOW LONG chs viut STAY MERE BuT yar,
ng cy

VISITING, HE ILL PRESUMABLY ALSO BE IN TOUCH WITH Eo Ped puttow x aw

'E, Fe DUTTON, ‘PURLISHERS, WHO HAVE ALREADY PUBLISHED SOME OF HIS
YORK. THERE IS A CREAT DEAL CF DD/P X DD/P INTEREST IN HLASHO,

THEY HAVE BEEN IN CONSTANT TOUCH WITH NIM IN PERLIN AND NE HAS

ty REQUESTED AN PADVISOR® WHILE WERE TO KEEP HIM CUT CF TROUBLE. «ON

THE BASIS OF HIS REPUTATION THIS COULD SE EITHER VERBAL INDESCRECTION,
PRUNYEDNESS OR TROUALE WITH THE LADIES) :

HE WILL, AE TOLD THAT HE WILL NOT BE GIVEN AN ADVISOR BUT THE

' FOLISK DESY vOULD APFREC LATE It IF YOU WOULD CONTACT THE IRC ¥ [RC

aD DETERMINE WHO WILL 3E VNOWLED* EABLE CONCERNING HIS BERAVIOR AND

. KIS VHEREAROUTS» THEN IT 15 AKTICLFATED THAT IF ANYTHING DOES co

LpONG, VE VILL LEASN OF IT QUICKLY. ALSO, YOU CAN CALL EVERY FEEK

- @& $0 TO SEE HOW THINGS ARE CCINC.

NATURALLY IRC ¥ IRC SHOULD NCT BE. CIVEN THE ABOVE. bE THINY
yeu SHOULD SAY THAT- “WE MAVE A NATURAL INTEREST IN HIS WELFARE WHILE

MERE, FLEASE ADVISE wHemM YOU SEEe: “ THANKS»


--- Page 96 ---
14-0000

SEGiET

Seiluass ai

Acting Chief, Security Division, I&j0° ‘LS april 1953:

~ Chief, Contact Liviston, CO _
a a a es iG 7 . . ;
" Maosinzex, ‘Gisela + concern About Physical security or oot

the subject vhich *’ :
-h), executive .
® representative

l. Enclosed -is oe copy or letter vrittes
yes transmitted by:Xr. Abram J. Becker, (EL
Qirector of the International Kescuo Commit

of this Civisioa. : :
2... Subject bas been tne atre&dy. of Sele office of tie

Inc for approximately three. yuara, u know, the Lit hos Lesa

prominent for aid given to woot Be (Din 19 currestly Li the .

midst of & campaign for aid to io arriving there in increasiag

numbers from tha hast. Io ber “Ayub juct reports elleged

attempts on. the Fart of "the aa kidnap her. In vies of her

ectivities and her connectic \iainer Hildedrandt’s Kacp?gruppe .

gegen Unmenschlichkeit,. ue) believes there may be soue basis :

pwe oubjact as @ cela person not given ,

for her feors. He aid (% e Kip
to hysterics; he is are Scoed, concerned about subject's safety.

& has been transmitted lo btaff C, 71, for

: 4, “any ing: concerning this memoruntum should be directed
to Mre. Virginia. Thorne, Extension 2202.

, : E. M. ASHCRAPT
Enclosure

VThorne:ble

Se



--- Page 97 ---
14-0000

“wir epanp rent No 08

wf

. ‘Office Memorandum

ITE
_ FROM 8
* SUBJECT:
try wa-8910

1. The PL

L Aug $2, US 50-

v SECRET =

Case LOTU - Source Leads fren

ty

. ‘UNITED STATES GOVERNM:

ww Files

ss of aliens sentioncd in ow Meno, of

y vase 10078,

Information”



--- Page 98 ---
14-00000

. Chhet, contact , pirioton os
arte ot Chicl, Index Branch ‘Thorne ) . Fe 52-698
Chief, Pittoburgh office 7 :
* Cape 10978 - Bource Leads trom IBC Fileo
8 TY wa-B910 - oS

pall names of aliens mautl ned in ow Memo of .

: ‘The
. 1 Ang “50, BY 52-6572, are?

2. Pull nanes and biograpbic information concerning
era na wt ete a,
py J 8-Littlefore-

CHARLES B KAUFMAN, JB

wD/aac

aia ~

: tat mation

:


--- Page 99 ---
14-00000

\ -T August 1952 ; ; og _
. : ~ PAN CIA .
| es
. PITTSBURGH — . - SOAPIREAPTAL A,
“(00 KAUFMALMT FROM ASHCRAPT BY TuDEX (THORS) wa CK BR__

RAW MED DED 1 AUGUOT, IP 52-672, ADIRESSED TO MR. CaAJKOWICL, ALTO
"BRANDI, RE COWDACT OF ALIENS RORCIK, SOAS AND LOPOSCKO, PLEASH FORWARD FULL ~
“HAMS FOR FILIG PIRDOSSS, oo. .
(YP WILE BE APPRECIATED IF, IN TIE FUNIRS, YOU WILL FORMARD ROTIPICATION
"OP COZACT OF ALIENS PRIOR TO CLEARANCE To TMEX. TUAIK YOU. ,

CONFIDENTIAL



--- Page 100 ---
14-0000

7 August 1952 ok wo
Ww -. , Viyorno beg) RO
. ; _ . ciate a .
PITSeOg, 7 couprmemrna:
, SECURITY BiFORMATION
“10 RAUPMAMU PROM ASHCRAPT BY INDEX (THORRE) WAL CK mR

REUR MEMO DATED 2 AUGUST, NE 52-672, ADORUSSED TO Mm. CZASKCWSKT, ALIN
BRANCH, RE CONLACT OF. ALENS KMIECIK, KOTAS AND Loposzky, PLEASE FORWARD, FULL

‘HAMS FOR PILING PURPOSES,

Tf WILL BE APPRECIATED i, Di TH FUTURE, YOU WILL FORWARD FOPIPICATION

OF CONTACT OF ALTENS PRIOR TO CLEARAICE TO INDEX. ‘THANK YOU.



--- Page 101 ---
14-0000

8 >

oe SER A763

o_
™N

: CL OTS Atop . ‘
Chiof, Contact Division ~ "ation 1 ang 52 ag
Anthony F CzaJkovekt . NY 92-672. — :

1. Contact with Motec!x, Kotas, and erko CD v:
Fl du) 52 indicates lov Toroign “TntolLigence ntial; They
fave boon away fro Poland for about ton years and get no
‘pertinent information in letters fron relatives remaining
- ‘tn Poland. They are better acquainted with pereond and
conditions around Bologna, Italy. :

i
a fhey are cooparstive, but unlave you have reason _
to believe that wortbuhile requircnants might result fran :
_@ request, ve do not intend to send in’ nam chetko. —

: a {
: CEARLSS B SAUPHASH, 28 a
. . 1
whose 7
oa \

J pecarnasinenn

:
2
<
>
s
~
conse: pr

an ORT eis
raat earners!

Be ee

eee



--- Page 102 ---
14-0000

ss

FTAROARD FORM wh 04 wt
eos

me . \ ae
"Office Memorandum *

Chief, Qetroit Office

suojuct: ‘Visit to, AlJen: FRANK EARASIE | -

#Y. Mr. Harasin was inter viewed on i August nat hie plece of business,
. the Pioneer Coffee Company, wl he is employed aga business alpinistrator.
' : He is presentiy residing at 533% McDougall, Detroit ll, Michigan. .
2. Subject was born 1 December 100; in Goezalxowlce, Poland.

Civil servant. _

1923-23 | Polish Ministry & Cormieree,, Warsaw, Foland.
This was a very smal:

1928-34. Manared own firm In the corn and food tree.
- . ‘concern.
‘ : _ 1934-39 | Silesian Steel 3

oundiries & Mills (Filsthiskd Foundry), located in
‘ Gherzow, Folard (formerly Xoenigshutte, Toland). .
1939-45., Polish Army - Mr. in was taken a prisoner of war by the Germans.
He escaped and joined the Folish Army in exile. His fantly disap-
penred during the wars [tis son is believed to be held in a
Russian concentration canp, if he ts still alive. : ,
1945-45 Resettlement and Welfare Officer, UNRRA and TRO, Germany and East -
Afvicn. While serving in this capneity, Mr. Harasin travelled in
the East African regicn of Tanz nyika, Uganda, and enya. His
7 . . purpose was to resettle Polish refusees in camps in these areas.
7 Subject knows this area well and could answer specific questions
regarding roals, aintroncs, settlements and cities.’
1948-51 Social work in England 7
2h July 1952 - Entered tha US at Hew York City.

. . 3. As a reserve captain in the Polish Arny, Mr. arasin worked for the
_ Ministry of Reconstruction of Adninistration, Polish Government in exile. He
- explained his duties as consisting of assisting in the conrlete administration

and reconstruction, and helping to place Polish nationals in Jobs to which they

“yould be best suited.
ed to leave Poland with her husband and she is”
not corresponded with her gince 1045. He does, -
nee with cousins Living in Chorzow and other

cities in Silesian part of Poland. He received a letter from one of his cousins
three months ago, wt said that it contained only fomily infermations He will

gladly turn over all future letters, if so desired.

4. Harasin's wife refus
still residing there. He has
however, conduct 4 correspondce

. f

a FAUL W. ICKS

WWNonicki:Jjd



--- Page 103 ---
14-00000

Se been nbaee

TN DARD Fone 84 . ~ " &
‘Office. Memorandum * UNITED STATES. GOVERNMENT
. . a as a f
ar Cksev, Contact Division  * , . ifs DaTR: 5 August 1952
D Atting : - redex _ — ary acre .
|) FROM; Chler, Detroit Office | Gs

Sunéct: visit to Allear Jonchin KOWATSCHERR . Bulgarian National
. . de ley Kovatschery. vas’ interviewed on’ August 1952 ‘at his place of
employment, Byrne Doors Companys where he is working a3 a draftsman. He is

Presently residing at LTAL Seward Street, “Apt. 105, Detsoit 6, Michigan.:

-APril 1923 an Nasalewsie, Bulgaria. |

ae . BS Subject was tow

“+ 1939- 1980-7 Workea in an airplene factory in Sofia,

. engineer, : .

“-1940~ ‘Yok. National Bulcartan Airplane Mfg. Plant, as
Attendad 4 technical hich school in Budapest, Hungary.
Attendai a technical university in Berlin, Germany; Studying
engineerin: \

“Sep 1Ohh Arrested by the Gestapo for retigi:
an Wes released in May 105, .
: May 45 - 10k8 ug Milltary Police, Berlin Gernany ~ Interpreter
G48 = Oct 51 UW CD Div. of crc. Subject was an investigator, and while
: servits in this capacity, he had the Opportunity.to i terrogate
abort twelve Bulsardan delegates to the World altos ‘onference
held in the Seviet one of Berlin. Ye said he inluced six of _
: : . these delerates to escape, and ther: are stil, residing in Berlin.
j . Their nenes and addresses may be obtained if so desired, :
12. November 1951 6 Avrived in New York city aboard the ss General Sturgis
Dee 1951-20 Jan 51 Turchon Follower Machine Co., Detroit, Michigan, as a draftsman.

ng to enter military service,

. 3. Mr. Xowatschery believes himself to
questions on certain Bulsarten econonies and minor political questions. He could
also deseribe tn detail the city of Nasalweizie, Bulgaria, which is on the Yugo=
slavian border, : . :

4 Sudveet conducts Trequen4 correspondence with his family in Bulgaria
through sources in the western and eastern zones of Berlin, te Source in the .
Soviet zone is by. Kowatsches¥ ts mother-in-law, from whon he last received 3 letter
three months age. % contained 9 description of the deplorabie living
conditions, but noth else, will turn over all future letters rrom Sov Zone

of Berlin and Bulgaria for Ow serutiny and retention,

We are submitting a hané check for subject with the hope that
theoning based on the contents of this meno.

«
Je
requiregents will be for

Wkonteki: ja

t PTIALS

ty Information


--- Page 104 ---
14-0000

\
. : o
. i
= i i .
= a t
a : |
4 i .
: ies . . a
, v0 Ea ar a : .
7 aie igeuse . . :
: ca : F
: . :
: he
: Ly : |
>
:
Bed ad ale Bary + .
nS
. a et a

RR a ence ot eee Ss ee



--- Page 105 ---
14-0000

OF eee SF
WMLUESoTA 9 7.

sa Contchey

Se GAL ye akso gens.

re
ny

WEG, ow fonts sures ei og i
ane ara geet ts
Seen PLO oe

wv BR DL Preagrere § at,
for aleen then preee.

View Sa Tag BV tet

Ate, FM TMs oun apeeté.

tastes, “aldeues Gillis eure tty
He bie a
Sa fe eepiermt os poe aL on tld aga
whic ded mata ot 22) Sones war. Fd

vay oStatesd in-cate, 1877.
4. Valdemare Catile ver hors tz Petremad, actets, C7 Jats 1.
fatets 2 [20 Pm istrit, foe pranede

Sia fassiy coved te
Fal ere
ia Riga.
Rie werk cen:

griret belat

Utiioe fre Os deve ay ug.
tetvis, ihe Rurslan Ary tegieta 2
Sadividis obo ticperurel siet Lie,
forsation, Calming went bens an. antia’
ag A vaitar at the offiger. f seu, my
“sy, dvak. «2:
task Gale, ihe bend chef, ant o
2 the fercicse vers stent t:
tell hie wives ant 3°24 wl
Beas in the Sisewebesés. hen 2c
Skat tee Rugetans aed elready ones fot
then ls Riga aod jolted the cart ity
wan miitiary feret: onteved Larrial Eas.
Lessted teat his wife and son tat

Sspebiad ty the 2.

oe i}vene 190, Ete wife bee fs ts baad fer the o9ec7
Bes AMO is Riga, vhera ore oN teria. ee

thing wf either wife oz cana sim? <e.
S$. Galite thea returned to whe Min atficers! gove ct a endter
for tte Satan, Ha wae plosal no hy bee Cems Any as a has-
aisp istera.eter on & Mervemter lid ytun ne was rat
grad for = few diosa. Fa Loam very io Mask,
Contact wlin Dickaley tess sia 4. GALL a wer ase
interpreter aris tie .
Wita aSe German arur he case eee mke
J Pobreary 14 c2 foined tae Tasco
Zo Poy 12447 his nencalatiens wier toe

acpreten.
aac7 Arey wera terains



--- Page 106 ---
14-00000

é .
.
. 4
. Poe yEO Deka ete pps ears em,
aes. ee
‘ y

Hota lan girt ss tereeny.

Thie meriope dh aa ver Atat
" estheidra witht tisk 2 7
Fa elte ves Coreitle wted Fre

we Beapetes

in

gh @ GACarei tye ot
. akin, Tha smeviety

te wal ptett

tashay da Tose ge ovlertove Ma entiete cote.

SAS vay met the tous af bis “ata,

aay ol the tacdris. of Dyse heateis de the prow
409 fer Ma arlatessa,

. ‘Hes Z te do with aettvdsivs
uatrat i MEER onsapane Som ’
bee de bat ig AM ote at

Boies
ér &
waa 4g12 that
W rancarte witn

ese SRD is eearey the carn
deovitles, be sertes
was affared
ost ofe a daSion w
te met.



--- Page 107 ---
14-0000

poe, ea gt : .
r moor Prope ae ome” ,
cet Sow pe Pe See tg OSM De
na
rasciet Cen jung petuceheay, oF 97
Leah pa) naatoad allies +
; ; Mh SET



--- Page 108 ---
14-0000 . -_ ”

. ” . : : ;
. STS ETE EET PEPTIay arene ete er Lcsergenes CRT RSS =

THIS, Coreg bie. rr



--- Page 109 ---
14-0000

een ee ote en ESC SE FRESE

SETAE

Smee meprermeme n fOTIT gis a ema iran, 9 tim re -



--- Page 110 ---
14-00000

. 2 wm Ty . L
: ; -
' {
, ut : Be ihe .
a : *
. . ”
Me : :
, : be .
‘ & : . : ‘
: ; > :
; ; ;
:
po oo
,


--- Page 111 ---
14-0000

SS-6F

CONFIDENTIAL 1621152 HOV 76 STAFF =
CITE DCD/NEY YORK 26449 2

=~
TOr DCD/HEADQUARTERS. mm
ETF CJOMYSTON) FROM BURDICK 3

WNIKTEL

SUBJ: CASE 61491, VALARIY VLADIUIROVICH MONDUKHOY IS G0

REFS: A. HES 17879, 5 NOV 7
"Be NGS 17699, 6 NOV 76 A -

>

SSOY

I. BEITHER IAS NORGE 1S ARLE TO FURRISH AN ADDRESS FOR A .
VALARLTY VLANI a TCH HORDUKHOV. HE IS HOT LISTED IN ANY OF THE

TELEPHOKE BOOXS F PRELIM OT Coy EP

2. WE ARE CHE RING THE LOCAL OFFICE OF LNERGO TO SEE IF THEY
HAVE A CUHRENT ADDRESS, AND WILi. ADVISE YOU AS SOON AS VE RE= =
CEIVE A RESPONSE.

FILE: CASE 61aS1
E2 IMPDET CL RY 913344
CONFIDE RTYALr


--- Page 112 ---
14-0000

” rake

CONFIDENTIAL 162l2cz ov 76 STAFF | oe
GITE DOB/SEW YORK 26450 :
TOs DCL /HEADSUARTERS «

EIF (O"TOSLE) FROM BURDICK

WATETEL

suaus, CASE 61491 :
REF? HES 17743, 16 WOV 76 ASEYOS CTI G IZ

1, 652 SOURCE AT HIAS INFORMS US THAT PAVEL GEIMAN 15 WOW LIVING
Ik CLEVELASD AUD CAN PROUABLY BE LOCATED THROUGH THE JEWISH .

FAMILY SERVICE, 2969 SOUTH TAYLOR ROAD, CLEVELAND HEIGHTS, OHIO,
4Allé. . ; ,
SSG
26 NELTHER HAS uORk JRO CAN FURHISH AN ADDRESS FOR SOFIYA
HE REFEREMCE -NESSAGE GAVE HER DATE OF ARRIVAL AS
3E2 AVTG. WE ASKED Otl? SOURCES TO CHECK UNDER BOTH 1975
AND 197%. SE WILL CHECY THE LOCAL OFFICE OF LYEKGO TO :

SEE IF THEY CAN FURNISH AN ADDRESS.

1B, ABDITIONAL BACKGROUUD INFORSATION, INCLUDING DATE AND PLAC

“OF BIRTH iS HELPFUL IN SERVICING REQUESTS OF THIS TYPE. .

FILE: CASE 61491
£2 INPDET CL BY 313344
COUFIDENTIAL


--- Page 113 ---
14-0000

“Sp 16 STAFF _ on
CLEL 2CD/arE YORK 26855 — ,
Tt UCO/KTACSUARTERS. .
OSS/AL IGN SEASCH CUIESIEC) FROM BUNIICK

eILNTéb

ative sounce AT THE.
aT CARLOS 3 v: :
) TRAVEL
HES ADD

SOURCE

QR ARRIVING IN
act LIVING

BOL TNA i

TS 10 OBTAIN moe Te. 4
SUNCE THESE €S 40 eaty “CALLED CLIFFORD (Pa OR
pute STING FOR A RGBERTO ALVAREZ I ELTHER CLIF PESIDE PARK

LISA GOT AVSY SO AUICKLY. WE WERE HOPING TO GIVE, PEARL
TQ UST HEN SPA {, SHOULD WE CLOSE THIS base AnD
TRE CORRESPONN

Lit CASE 88372
THSDET CL 3Y 13344

oe 6 CR ET
i .
i { o—
a . ¢ :
+ a .
i; :
H H .
: .
t .
i , : .
1


--- Page 114 ---
14-0000

poy ; Sopa
-_ os CONEY

. . :

MEMORANDUM FOR: Executive Secretary
: - Office of the DCI

FROM - : Charles A. Briggs
~ Chief, Services Staff

Acting Deputy Director for Cperations

“VIA
SUBJECT : International Rescue Committee, Inc.

1. The following information on the IRC is for
background only.

2. In August 1950, Outline for Project QXGAUNT
was approved for the purpose of acquiring biegraphic
information on tep-level defectors/emigres from an.
official of the I8C. The sum of $2,500 was to be pro-
vided by covert ceans. A partial payment of $1,250
was advanced on 30 August 1950 but was refused by the
IRC representative, who stated he would supply as much :
_of the information désired as possible without cost.
The project was closed as of 31 August - 1950.

{ 3. In Novenber 1950, David Martin, Executive |
Secretary of the IRC met with George Carey, Assistant = - _:
Director for Operations, with 45 many as five proposals . .
for collaboration tetween CIA and IRC. One proposal was | :
‘for the support of a European Institute which would pro-.

vide employment for displaced scientists, journalists,
etc. He was informed that CIA had no funds for financing .

such a project.

poe : Charles A. Briggs .

, ; _- E2 IMPDET
tos . : €L BY 012170

CONFIDENTIAL


--- Page 115 ---
ae 7 9 April 1976
DRAFT

Mr. Charles Sternberg
Executive Director

- International Rescue Committee, Inc,

386 Park Avenue South
New York, New York 10016

Dear Mr. Sternberg:

As you might surmise, your organization is well
Known to the Agency. Following the receipt of your
letter of 31 March 1976, a more definitive search for
information pertaining to your request was conducted,
No information was located which would indicate that

‘CIA has ever provided funds to the IRC either directly

or indirectly. -I trust this letter will allay any

apprehensions your organization has had in this

matter,

If I.can be of further assistance, do not

hesitate to contact me.

Sincerely,

George Bush
Director



--- Page 116 ---
14-0000 . es

conrl
CLIE DOE/:

Creo T
i



--- Page 117 ---
14-0000

baaebs

c! 0 nF IDEN" TIA

CITE comTeeTsyyey Yor¥ Laeon"

CONTESTE/ HASH TSTON

SNFFORT DIV/ALT2N STAF
EVBINCTs CAST 59421 = 4,

WE VERE aPvrsen oy

on pan ATION THAT SIZYNK SUIT HIS JOR THE RE ON 4 MAY 1973 aud LEFT

«Mic) HE IS

eee
PIZVUE'S ADLHESS DURING

FILE: case seat

CONFIDENT TAL

EDING anoaese, ace

ae

L Hiisas2 NAY 73

t v.
74
ae
; a.
. ‘w
,
BTAFF L

FOCNTEMLES) FROM c

ANORE NIZVUY

A TELEPHONS

RELOCATING IM mew

BUSY OF 1a May’

ORO ENS Ta THE

CARROLL
A)- 113350

TLOMIST AT LOGOS DEVELOPYENT.

vE WILL © Ontary sssoY
973. £2 EODET cL BY ornare OK



--- Page 118 ---
14-0000

ee

. pes/SD/Alien ‘Seatf
George Nesgoy

‘epe.
2D 40
Headquarters

International Rescue Committed, Tace

Room 614, Key Buildiog ,

2775

7 ; weed

§ Juno 1973

The attached copy of NY-603-

73, dated 31 May 1973, is
for your information and = —
retention. : Se

You will recall CDC interast
in IRC, We are getting full
support from IRC put is isa
pade up of some strange in-
dividuals, nevertheless.

Would like to discuss with
you sometime next week. —

GNeagoy:ro



--- Page 119 ---
14-0000

‘ERNMENT
a NY 8608-73"
bare! 31 May 1973

Acting Chief, New York Field Office. ©

Anternational Réscue Committee,. Inc.

7 helpful to us over a number of years. |
“simplify our problem of ‘making initial contact with USSR nationals. They. are
particularly sensitive and suspicious,

them according to Sternberg.

| : . 7 "3, We explained to’Sternberg that we cannot do what te suggested, but
Ie _ ain turn we suggested that in instances where a new arrival is ill at ease,.
13 we should wait a few weeks or: months until the new arrival has settled down,
Fe founda place to live, and ‘hopefully,:.a satisfactory -place of employment. .

tell Sternberg that we will discuss his. suggestion

4. We did, however, .
d in this particular problem.

with our associates intereste

i a 5. Do you have any advice or comment? ew

oo. a os Ws Pewk

st : . a
foe ( : | A/C WALTER L. FREUND

\pherseria
v

_ FILE: International Rescue Committee

CONFIDENTIAL Je? INPDET cL 0 004476"

Buy U.S, Savings Bonds Regularly on the Payroll Savings Plan



--- Page 120 ---
14-0000

™

Director, ponestie Contact Service ce a ay 1973
* LATIN: Support Division/Alten Branch (Neagoy) mo

Acting Chiof, New York Fleld Office.
International Rescue Corimittee, Inc.” aoe

Ag ioal
narles Steribor: “Executive Director of the International
; TRC) on 10 May 1973, In the course of our conversation,
Sternborg, noted’ that wo had shown quite a bit-of interest in Soviet arrivals
(defectors) recently -and suggostod ‘that it would be of a great -advantuge to
us if wo wore able to introduce ourselves a5, for instance, ropresontativos
. of, a scientific institute rather than Agency enployoes. - ° :

J. 2... fe are quite certain that Sternberg meant woll and had our benefit:
4a mind when he mado this suggestion. Sternberg has been cooperative and
helpful €o us ovor a number of years. hls suggestion particularly ‘aims to
‘simplify our problea of making initial contact with USSR nationals. ‘They are
iparticularly sensitive and’ suspicious, ‘and CIA has, a very ominous meaning to

‘them according to Stornberg.
!

Rescue Comal

. 3, We explained to Sternberg that we gannot. do what ho suggested; but - -
‘in turn we suggested that. in instances “herd S new arrival. 13. ill at oaso,
‘we should wait a few wooks or months until the nov atrival has settieddown, -
‘found a place to live, and hopefully, 8 satisfactory placo of: omploymont.

. 4, We did, howover, tell Sternverg that we will discuss his suggestion
. jwith our, associates interosted in this particular problem, : :

Le

S. Do you have any advico or comment?

A/C WALTER L. FREUND |

' NNGraber:dh

| FILE: International Rescue Committee

: CONFIDENTIAL

+ pMPDET CL BY 004476" 7



--- Page 121 ---
14-0000

|

“REFS fl.'t-219673
|
4

“! 9, Bepavey ToLD 25 MIS FATHER 4AS AY

A
oe os ae

7

i

{

i

im

.

 hiee
a ; ; rh.

| Zz
COUFIDENTIAL 1117372 VAY 73 STAFF oa

CITE covractssuny YORK 190k a

i .

COUTARTS/ YASH INGTON

SUPPORT DIV/ALTEN STAFF ¢SCHYC ICH) Fiz0% ezanea

1 6259 ;
sungecty “CASE BPI3e = NIKoLAY .RUDaKay 7] 7 & Beh DG _
. go fF

Sea aeeneR AIRE ee

Il. S/S GRABER MET EVOAKOY AT THE THC CINTL

T A.JO8 AND LOOZING

| .
OFFIct OAT MAY 1973, IMOAKCY IS A3C!T TO

FOR A PLACE TO LIVE. HE VAS NOT ANKICUS TO PE INTERVIENED BY us,

fr ‘WANTED TO CRT SETTLED FIRST, ME PROMISED TO CALL US WEDNESDAY, ©

Is YAY, TO ‘LET WE KNOY UP HE FOUND A PLACE. 12 LIVE AND WHERE.

"

fk IN THE SATE INSTITUTE

HERE HE WAS EMPLOYED AND NOT A FAMOUS PERSOY AT ALL. HE DIED APOUT

FIVE YEARS aon, UE COULD POT GET AMY NoPE DETAILS AT THE TIME.

SHO IS THE FAMONS RUDAYOV NE COULD Hate RELATED TO?

3. YE WILL YEEP You tsroaxen OF ANY FIETHER Paosmess, z2 MPDst
CL BY 774476
FILER CASE 671334 IRC

CONFIDENTIAL


--- Page 122 ---
14-0000

“CaN FR. DET. A L 1510362 JAN 73 STAFF : : oo

‘eTLEs cass SM48b TTL §

tO - ane ae

CITS CONTACTSZ

CONTAGTS/MASHINGTO : ; . . 53
w

Sepeget NTVISTONZALE

enzleot: CASE

C TOLD MG THAT THIS)

HOULD MALT FO? AT LEAST OVE WOSTM,

Que BEPVICTNA RESTS

3, TO INDESLINE THE D oe
THAT ME DAD #OT vAUT TO MT

Trav 74 york CLry.

WITH AN: EMPLOYEE OF HTS

a, WHEN SURGECT. CaN me CONTACTES, JOE CANFOLL OF THE VEY YORE

SPICE VILL HAIRLE THIS Tot PY S74476

coMPED ENTIAL


--- Page 123 ---
14-00000 os

“Chick, Zoston Office |. 1972

ATTA: fon E. kelly--~

mart DivisioAlien Staff -

wuiieaase > 41° 4

27-72, Sacce Subject, dated 2
c-kelly telecon, Sane Supject, dated $
or lv7d.

1.) This ‘nen covers subjec

if stacas to - is country.

x has been & very C09; rative

nee conponents. :
5s to help Tereshko. :

ver, also Teslize that
and prolizie reports producer for the
We ant to itake Cleur that we have no ce

3. ‘teres uko should find his” oun way to rail letters: to dansk
through partics located-in otuer citics. Sunje
he has {rienis in New York City what he could use for tis purpose.

. : 4. Ke coatictid the office handling Tereshko's refuul for his |
. rtpecs ied vere: inior.cd that he will shortly reccive a

cold rubles which could not be changed

sony in a‘weck or Twos | we will for-

. we Fecelive th
ara it to you.

rently feresnko feels an attraction to work for itdio
which was offered to hin, Tris asin is his own \

decision althouzh he has a good position and a fine future with his

H PECOSIE Crnnyrainy o

7 ‘ 6. We have foam fren exp erience. that defectors vorerally blane
us for decisions and actions whic: fail credit their osh astuteness
for those developacnts which succeed. would like, however, to point -

E 2 IMPET CL bY 004476 7 . :



--- Page 124 ---
14-0000

tet eet tee upein n

3
j
i
‘

ENGI Ear EE ett on oe

«

~—Peqair

Page 2

pit that your | in serving

edule with ais ¢

in spite of his heavy ‘ork s

INES KR Mua

FRilasioe/sa .

HE

ET |

rielings...


--- Page 125 ---
14-00000

trips abroad
Bast.

ia ve red da both trips shortly eter,
ghould she

vr. Lohomnn's nano.
tative calle of her.

ta Juno Sra. Lord qoanel us tye books

no reply to wr queries to headquarters (NY
no Ten ty 197 and Wy 16766 of 3

rile: Mra. ‘aTy lord.
ee! Internationa} (arama)
cer International (weFtagh)

on Porpidou.

{a

on 16 Avgus

wo. we raturned these zo vrs. Lord
“(yY-6360T1. of oh june 197; Fora

visit ye in response to
- winter (see 90-B-332T1-79)- ) i,
information related to the requirements of case 98.162. wee pe
2, cad septenber Mrs. Lord Leaves for. Burops on & trip connected with
ner duties with the Atlantic Treaty Association. We do not know how long sho
will de gone: put if Serer trTpy are ORY tre it probanly will be nO
: woeks. sna ay learn pore about Pospidor, although ste.
X ‘ vq received requirensnts against

tnatructions ©

since we

had received

610

sewtthrsdlAemna wn

ABN aif BE et, Bs tbat, sesvllt. send »
4 Tt ee ES lik ite: ae ebea Rrecesllh.. wallet...


--- Page 126 ---
14-0000

oe

tiy-ogt-T2
L . 23 March 1971":
anoest POR THE RECORD <p 1/5 SOUT

gubvect: call fron Jack Cogsvell, 22 verch 1971
er . .

~ 8 55S Ly

“r ~ Cogswell eetenhonel to- infor that the Internationst Rescue _

a Comittee planned $ to ‘hold a Press “conference on 8 March en i9Th, in Now

- York to discuss pels oners in “exbaa jails. Cogswell | voieed the nope

that the conference yould not nave ony paverse effects on atcexpts

whe eee

underway to obtain the release of Lavrence xi oy Lunt frome cuban

\
prison, Re “explained that "poacho" ("who is know to your people, I
on sure") ts on his way to vexico city with $3.5 00. :He will contact o

worn. thers who epparently. knows who to poy off to exrange tunt" 6

release. cogswetl indicated that “they” noped to py no nore then

$10,000.

1

RPBLIDT
File: Jack Cogswell
VA : International. Division (ueller)

aad


--- Page 127 ---
14-00000

| . ‘ LO
Fp ~ aan
t =
i 1
2 4
1
4
: ee
i .
I
'
i
| SEC @ FT Cayserz MAT 71 CITE. CONTACTS/NEW YORK 1133
| ;
1 o£ gastactesvasurvaran memes
i
Y ALIEN STATF CKONIOXDD FROM GRAPES ox
.  aenreepe any . : . ° ,
i s ECT: CASE SEr7a “ou
: | - £ YOUR VA FEZES ge AUP NY LELE 55
: | Tyo KE MAVE PESLATECLY mae ARE CONTINVDIS TO CREE wITY
cot SZ ININ
: | EOI? INTN,
: ¢ TYEM
i |
1 | PEPQ, SEREAIN ON UuGM VE YAVE RECEIVES BIO MATA
in : : ; .
: I ON FORVAPDED A NAVE CHECK SEQNEST. TO NEARAVARTESS, DOES NOT xeow
| : .
ft SARIVIN'S WHEELED OUTS.
| T fEvTeAL FILES oF TeNs
i .
H 8. YON ¥IGUT coNsrnes E STAIAY COMCEENING FaTININ,
1 sir: ee ase

a .

H CASE 8607S TFsb |

! “Sf . .
iio .8bR PET -

‘

:

: .

:


--- Page 128 ---
14-00000

\
1

'

OFATY a,
gt ject ee “sy
= SEP OT TT PE ee Sasa el
REF: TELECONS PETYEEN Ve ¥T 0
AND § “42CH 1971 Bb . .
; 1 . mM PTTrS
PLEASE TOY THROUGH VAUD CONTESTS AT IMTEMMATIOWAL RESCUE COMMITTTS
RETAPAING VUEOEAPOUTS OF WASININ at GEAEBINe ALEC TOY TINT ASAT.
GREAT PRE SCIRE MEQE. WOULD APPPECTLTE ANY TEARS INCLUDING Tee Yar 7 ION
TILE NUMMER, TF AVATLASLE, THONY yO, ee!
SECRET



--- Page 129 ---
14-0000

wear sear crete

. :
ATES GOV RANMENT
2

UNITE . .

y Memorandum ™ 6 S-6Y

TO tpirector, Domestic Contact Service a DATE: 12 dune 1969 ~
ATIN: (ur. Murphy) : : : ‘

_ FROM: Chief, New Yor’ Field offi . ot

ened O CS VY/e

SUBJECT: Necting “with Edmnd Cumaings> Dept. of Imigration, US Catholic a

Ket bept. of State moto of 12-May 69 from Wa, C. Truchcart, forvarded.
to NYFO on 16 May 69. a .

~~ at : y woe

ipl. Qn 6 dun 69 Deputy Chief, NYFO, seconpanted by C/S El1iff,
met with Easund Cumiings to discuss ary. aspects of the relationship
detween his. office and the Agency that might be unsatisfactory to hin.
This. appointment was requested by NYFO as a result of the coments made
by Cumings im referenge MEM. |} wand
: wanings SSS :
2. When we opened the discussion with the statement that we
haa heard indirectly that the question of cooperation with the CIA had
arisen at the ACY), meeting, Cucmings imnediately steted that this was
indeed the case, and for-his part, he wished to have no contact at all
: - with our Agency." Invited to- elaborate on his reasons, Cumninss said.it-..
: could be very Menbarrassing” were it to become know that he had furnished
information oa Czechoslovak refugees to the CJA. He later stated that it
could be extrenely dangerous for refugees to have contact With the Agency»
_. since if this fact were knew, it could bring -harm to themselves or to
.. their femilies still in Eastern Europe. tf he had furnished the informa-
tion-about the location of a refugee to wom hara later canc, it would
cause hin great anguish. -He knew, he said, of an instonce in Connecticut: .
in which a refusee who had coopérated with the Agency was beaten up by
oo: Commrist agents. Cumings did not respond to our invitation to elaborate
on this incident, which ve said was unknown to us. Cummings said that not
only was ‘he concerned avout CIA activities involving refugees» but that if
cognizant, the US vishops would be unhappy about CIA involvesent with
organizations such as the US Catholic, Conference. Again, Qominss declined
to elaborate. Cumings suggested that we ‘get our information from the Iels
to whom the US Catholic Conference furnishes data and he was ‘unsympathetic
to our desire to Rave this information on @ more, tincly basis than was -
possible with reliance oA [ws records. “He also suggested that arrange; .
ments to see refugees in the US be made with the. refugee in Swope and that ~~
the refugee be given a telephone number to call after nis arrival. Res- .
ponding to cur direct gtestion, Casings said he viewed cooperation with ‘
the FBI in a different light and would not deny its agents inforzation ”

they requested.

Ray ULS, Savings Bonds Regularly on the Payroll Savings Plas

pel ae

ae Poe oo fe


--- Page 130 ---
14-0000

why

3

w¥#399-69
-2- 12 June 1969

"2.3, We wish'to emphasize that Curmings made none of the
temehts to ‘us.that he did ‘In paragraph two of reference memo. On
ontrary, in. résponse to ‘our direct question, Cursings said that
-his objections were t of ‘principle rather than of manner of approach
‘by the NYPO. “At no time-during our conversation, with hin did he make
‘any objection-to the procedure set up between hin: and C/S Elliff to”
. facilitate the acquiring ‘ef the information we requested. We do not have
an .. _ any doubts that Cuwoings did indeed nike the statements attributed to him
~ ies 7. 4n reference memo, but it 4s at least interesting that he specifically ©
° -. refuted them in our presence.. After displaying nothing but hostility
> toward the Agency. during cur entire meeting, he invited us to call upon
_ him in the future if he "could ever do anything for us personally.” -
Obviously. we do not expect to contact him on any basis in the future and_
‘we are certain that he does. not anticipate further inquiries fron this .

office.

and other officials of the Dept. of Immigration, US Catholic Conference:

the first contact with Cumings was on 11 Sept 68 and the
results of that meeting are contained in wx#677-68 of 11
Sep 68, This was straight-forvard request for informa-
tion on how the US Catholic Conference would handle the in-
flux of refugees. As can be seen from the memo, Cumnings
was cooperative and, in fact, offered more assistance to us
than we later requested. We spoke on the telephone with ~
. . Curmings a few weeks later to soy that, in all likelihood,
- we would only be needing to ask for address information on
° selected refugees occasionally. For this information, he —
referred us to Mrs. Irene Bilinski. On 12 Dec we saw Mrs. -
Bilinski who wogsecuperavtvetirfurnishing information on
(7 a specific Czechoslovak refugee. Upon our return from

Washington in late January 1969, @ number of requests had
piled up and we tried. to obtain the needed information -
through Mrs. Bilinski. She pleaded that they were very busy,
extremely behind in their filing and asked that we call-on

her later. L
Lb 16F

“b. c/s ELUiff-reports as follows on-her contacts with Cummings -


--- Page 131 ---
14-0000

6 §Sb

: - ‘gatisfied that our inquiries were legit

: : | N¥#399-69 \
3-00 + 12 dune 1969 ‘

"since 4t,@ppeared. in late March that Mrs. Bilinskd would.

“not be available in the’ foresecable Miture, we called again

"on Cummings Gnd-explained the provlea. We said we under=:,

‘stood the probleas involved for thea in providing this in-,

_ formation, -in view .of. the fact. that they were extremely busy,
and said-we would appreciate anything he could do to facilitate

“matters. © There was one address we necded urgently. ‘and this

. Cummings obtained for-us ville we waited. We left with hin
about six three-by-five cards on other refugees, plus 4 stamped |

‘self-addregsed envelope, and asked that he return the cards, - :

Oi with the address and employment data added, at his convenience. Bo

7

After that, we sent Cumaings two letters requesting idata on
additional individuals and received replies in due course,
After hic receipt of the second letter, Cwanings cakled Deputy.
Chief, MtFO (whose name he had obtained from Charles’ Stermyexrg an
ntioaal Pagcuc-Casniztee) to cheex on Miss ELliff's . *
According to Deputy Chief, NY¥FO, Cunmings was. ‘
dmate and only expressed
the hope that they could be, kept to a mininua. We suesested the ~
. mail procedure agreed to by Cumnings only in the interest of
saving the time of an obviously overworked organization. - 2 0.

bona ffie

~hen the account of Cumaings': complaints to the Department: of ©
State official reached us, we endeavored to sect up an appoint-
ment for ourselvesand Deputy Chief, NYFO, to see. him, Our first
call in this regard was-on 19 Moy. He said it was a very busy
week and asked us‘ to ¢all later. We ealled the following week
and he again stated he was extremely busy. We said we did have
one address to ask him avout and asked if we might see hin
briefly. He invited us to write him for the information,and
assured us that’ this would be entirely satisfactory. We wrote
on 26 May and he replied the following day, much faster than he
had previously. When we called him on 6 June, he invited us to
meet with him that afternoon, We estimate that we have requested
address: and employment information on about 13 individuals. Since
this is ‘the only data requested from Cummings, we do not under-
stand his statement in reference memo that he nad "become con-

. cerned over the ‘numbers and types of request." In addition to
‘Cummings and Mrs. Bilinski, we have contacted Yrs. Ly Poroniy,

“whom we sew in 1967 in connection with Case 49,355, Although. she

could not furnish the current Location of the individual in whom

we were interested, she was extrencly cooperative." i ie CAEL

“/ 7; C

eer &

sl) JACKSON R. HORTON

LEI rs
WLFreund:kf ; :

On



--- Page 132 ---
14-00000

: ae z
% ,
av Y -

wa eave
mer gTe MIoTIt TEARS FUEL A Se

aTTDSA ot vim

Cnty FOLLGY

Tine a

Posy



--- Page 133 ---
14-0000

— ee

reapers

comotekens, aasTA A D904

epee corse



--- Page 134 ---
14-0000 “oe ~

ve AME PIMV OTE PPR TERT AL

UO tf, Sigaert

MUA YATES >

iy ts am Say MIer ries

Te

;
4. THorgyet > *

PN OPICIOTYT verge viet way

evites, TTY THAT

iota &

STERUET AT IONS



--- Page 135 ---
14-0000

tech Se : ene - -

oi

” r
aoe Prpen tra ‘
pay mrs
:
‘
:

Bn te rr nen a car aan

Sede HoT tT tec


--- Page 136 ---
14-0000

cla Roquests to Refuges

‘rgantzations in New York ~

soviet oc Division, DCS

Paul Je Lead: afexto .

Chief, New, York Offtée

ec: Director,

bes

.

AC Line

7 Gf

16 Yay 1969

Jack,

Jin Hurshy ‘showed us the
attached corresponzence, which
followeup on his carlier
discussion of the subject
prodlea with yous Ee askee that
we send you'a cspy, and would -
like your coments on it. Jin
would de interested in the
rational for going the rail

-route instead of personal visits

by the CS's. As FE reationed
during your brief visit on
Nednesdcy, wo ere revieving the
entire ICS Czech rete
procedure, with en eve to
cutting back eur general
effort.

2
 Aeoss 1g

Look f Wut Ugewive


--- Page 137 ---
14-0000

on

IN TOP ANO UOTYOM
INTIAL pO”

a . _-

: Remarkst

: . Jim:

: . _ I received the attached correspondence
“from Bill Trucheart this morning.

roam wo, CHO: 1888 O + 357-35

aa? 237


--- Page 138 ---
14-00000

_ OEPARTMENT OF STATE

Warnngton..0.0. "308

May 12, 1969 ”

Mes Thomas Ul. Raranessines
Deputy Director for Plynas
“Central Intelligence Agency

SUBJECT: CIA, Requests to Voluntary Agencies ita
New York .

attacning a menordindum from Mr, Laugel of Ambassacor
seuffion his neetings in Now York with vartous represer

of the voluntary a ar fon his report

encies, Trt would apnenr £ i
that concern among the voluntary agencies wera approaches is

more widespread than we had at first supposed.

e

William C. Truckeart —

INR/DNC
attachment: .
As stated.
SCCRET

207



--- Page 139 ---
14-00000-

eee ees eee ee : al
wee eee etme atte

oo © UNITED STATES GOV aNMENT : nn
~Memorancum set
TO. a INR - Me. Willian Cc. Trucheart oo DATE: May 9, 1969 ©
_ “enon 1 S/R:ORM - paynona W. Laugetp” .

supject:. CIA Requests to Voluntary Agencies in New York
mae fe A G9-/6F
: Anbassador/Grahan Martin has asked me to inform you .of
conversations which were held in my presence by certain:
voluntary agency representatives with regard to CIA
requests for information ‘on Eastern European refugees
‘(primarily Czechs) who have been arriving in the U.S. as”
_a result of the Czechos lovak-USSR crisis. The following
information was obtained on a confidential basis while I
. was in New York his work to, worl on an unrelated project:
fi form, ‘ - of
(1) On -May 5, after concluding my. own pusinde aL F a
cussions, Dr... J, Papanck, President of the Anerican Fund
for Czechos lovak,,t UZECS red ty? expressed his deep cone
cern over being ‘asked to supply information on the where-
abouts of his former -countrymen. Dr. Papanek told me that
the CIA is checking on 4 large number of Czech refugees,
most of whom have no special experience or qualifications
which would seem to be of particular interest to the United :
States. He knows that.many of these people are being sub-
jected to intensive interrogations which bewilder and a
‘frighten them, The-procedure was initiated last October by }
a CIA man who identified himself as Norman N. Graber. !
. Dr. Papanck receives his requests by letter (he showed me i
. one sample) which simply Lists the names and other basic: |
, data, either immigration number or date of birth. The —
return address used by the CIA is P.O, Box 1294 in Grand
Central Station, Co which Dr. Papanck is to send his reply +
that is, the latest U.S. address recorded in his files. :
“Dr. Papanck did not mention a specific number of names
or requests puc he said they are growing and he is very —
uncomfortable about it; he does not want his: good name or
agency to become identified with the CIA. He indicated, : _
in addition, that the method of operation secms heavy- po
handed in comparison to that of the. FBL, whose agents
present themselves in person, make their requests known

i

g
ed -
re - SECRET
fice roup. : :
4 Excluded from automatic downgrading and declassification

Baas) Buy U.S. Savings Bonds Regularly on the Payroll Savings Plan


--- Page 140 ---
14-0000"

SECRET
et a

“and are serviced to. the extent permitted by Dr. Papanck.
If this information is essential to U.S, interests,

Dr.. Papanex cannot’ understand why it is not handled on’ .-
vernmental basis =- namely have the CIA obtain ©
ion -from. the Imuigration and Naturalization
ich is résponsible for alien registration. in

Service,
‘the United ,
mr ne ; : - - on

, after concluding my work with 3) SEL

§, Associate Director of the U.S,

-the question again came up. =e

sed his agitation over the seemingly

amateurish and scattershot method by which the CIA is

operating in this field, -He also questioned the value of
interrogating simple refugees who are not defectors with

- special qualifications er background. Mr. Cummings said

elie, Cen!

Si eein es es
fr, Cucztings expr

the groundwork. was laid sometime ago (no date mentioned)
‘by a female officer: of the CIA, and that he agreed to the:
exchange of mail proéedure utilizing the P.O. Box at
* Grand Central, However, he has become concerned over the
‘numbers and types of requests. He suggested, as did
_ Dr. Paparex, that INS might be the proper contact point
he for CIA.” Me. Cummings also mentioned that the FBI agents.
5 - + appear in person and he indicated. that their approach
- seems more professional, - ole
. . ot S- S Sb Y .
(3) "I was also informed by Mr, Cummings that the
: : ; Internarional Rescug Committeds Inc.» whose Executive
- : Trector is Mr. Charles Sternberg, was somewhat alarmed
‘by the sane CECA ION: Tad “previously consulted
Mr. Sternberg on my own project but he did not raise the
CIA matter with me. A VO? 7

. (4) On May 7 L.attended (as an observer) a meeting
of the Comaittee on Migration and Refugee Preblems,
American Council of Voluntary Agencies for Fereign
Service, Inc., which was called to discuss. refugee and
related ters... The meeting was-chaired by the Rev. John.
> rece WL Schauex of the Church World Service; in addition tw

eri :
es EF Hog

SECRET


--- Page 141 ---
14-00000

Council officers, representatives of seven voluntaty
sagenctes were present. Those in attendance were:

Mr. Eugene Shenefield and
Miss Etta Deutsch of the :
American Council of Voluntary Agencies

Mr; Edmund E, Cummings and
Mr. John McCarthy of the . .
United States Catholic Conference

Mr. Donald E. Anderson of the
Lutheran Inmigration Service

Mr. Gaynor Jaeohson and
Mr, Harry Freeaman of the
United HIAS Service

Mr. Charles Sternberg of the
International Rescue Committee

.. ‘ & ro
: Dr. Jan Papanek of the # SU 7 7
mo “American Fund for Czechoslovak Refugees
Mr. Teymouraz Bagration of the -
Tolstoy Foundation ©

Chairman Schauer also represented the

Church World Service ~) = OOG

7 . ee a weeSS T

At one point the meéting went off-the-record to hear
from Mr. Cummings of USCC, who had been assigned to study

the 'CIA problem," But Chairman Schauer opened the dis-
cussion by announcing rather mysteriously that he had

been: in touch "with Washington" at the appropriate level --

implying that the Council should at least table the matter
for the time being. Mr. Cummings then moved thac (a) there
‘would be no further discussion of it, and (b) ‘each volun-
tary agency should deal with the CIA as it sees fic on an
individual agency basis. His motion carried and the
Council procecded to other business.

SECRET


--- Page 142 ---
14-0000

. . ° _— ° a on
o4- ; - : co .
. ‘The above “information was volunteered to me. _ during the, an
: mention ny. general interest in overall problems the volun-
tary agencies are facing. At the Council meeting I said
nothing. on this subject.
: ; . .
.
-

SECRET


--- Page 143 ---
aby

tT

SULENSe .

ome

14-0000

Weeks

r.
ie

ED IN Goe5-

"

sear
ure



--- Page 144 ---
14-00000

DELETE TRE ¥ORD

“



--- Page 145 ---
14-00000

= ©
“
- S
sf CRE t WS1459Z° SEP gs-@1te ceiracTavy7y Yor o3
CONTACTS/VASHINGTON
SOVIET FLOC RIVISIGN CWELCND FRO FRTENS
gusgecT: CASE 916838
1, INTERWATIONSL SES" roe ute
yas FIRST AND MAIN VOLUNTESY , Lees
cr HUNGARTAN REFUGEES te pote Aun ASAIN gery tr Be
RESARDI¥a CZECHOSLOVANS. TOP FANS LTE mpensty ELE 5
FROW VIEMKA, WHERE HE STETIER MTTEVSLORS OF peasy
SKARLES STERNBERG, RESECTLEW ST SE yraes Osat ts
| WIMSELF GF CZECH JENTSF OF ICTS: gpiarg TDs.
1 .

@. AS OF LABOR MAY, sevecel TeOUTAYE COPSReGLAVAYS TS eucTPts

4eNT apne

KaD INDICATED QESTIE 4

as REPORTED IN PRE

AND LK EMBASSY HAS [sSTeLTT TONS TA Avent

ISSUES Visas To OEETHOSEL VANE ry arate re CANT renkard Te

CANADA ESEXNPECTED po antir Re

1
1
| 3. UP TO ANEH@THESD UE TOT tL OF Se rr oe

EXPECTED IN PIPELINE witets

| FOR EMIGKATION TO U.S. TST e]ht WAWDES RNY VASE ~
, upen TO cCOPENATE TH Se yee
{


--- Page 146 ---
14-0000

PAGE 2 CONTACT S/NER. YORK aye SES PE

SOURCES»

ae STERNBERG uoen occas

“up PROCZDURES FOR TSSUING visas. UNO?
ano oF THOSE STILL TASIDL CONTEMPLATING
g. PLEASE COORDINATE Ith ALPEN STAFF

FAMILIAR WITH £20 SET UP.

ge CRET

AUSTRIA wOULe UNCER MTSE morals ROTH ag THOSE

5, ve WILL EE tH ToucH vETH TP? ann FASS

FLIGHE.

rer

fou TA URGE TUAT Uste

M3

pany ouTaTae es

S85

ee


--- Page 147 ---
14-0000

. . a Oe ees oe .
~ oo - | FOS SeF

1

Chief, Contact pivisten. _ 20 July. 1964.”

atm 1 CAC scatt. - . MIM -, 257-64

chief, Miant Field Office 4

‘arrivals of Cubsn Refugece via Spata

1, ‘We havo mado srrangementa | to receive periodic lfetings “of

“Cuban Rofugees who arrive fo the US via chartered flights from Spain.

-The first list we hove obtained ia appended. all local orrtvale aro

being sent letters instructing them to raport to opa-Lecke.
5.5564

2. Th flights are organized by the Iacernational | he fugee Com

mittee. No further inforration fo ‘available locally om any of the
‘ pafugeea listed. We “will attempt to lecato those. settling in Florida.

"Please handle balsnce as you 6a0 fic.

JUSTIN F. GLEICHAUP

JPG: 8b

Atcochmont:
List of Cuban Refugees



--- Page 148 ---
i ~ Lo we
at. / S De
:
_
far ‘4 a
rhe . .
aose RT NTA Uae aed a
Fhye ce, . . oe . 7
OLE uw ere svoru7se, - 33
é YF, .
yt, Bee Be 60 aan
ne dy Csannes Wes pu te 4
Ho "a3 TD GALA Gut OTR ee
fatty SL. --7O |
ab. ow OF Set 2 Cer
gy f SOc ea
| ISLA A THE
at
,

Mb oe

MOLE: PRUGUCER a Daten

‘
. PURE MAGI SUDBOT , on
aol) fe BANOVITO A wea

MONTHS AGG, AST das vel:

Soe

HIDELEGNE OF Yuu ae e eae

, iste IP ae Tey. AT x
SMISTNDNS To 0 h
v pete Gr te
‘" gonrecta, G2 uy 7
GBYIDUSL, GenS ck} oe TF TR DE FD ALS

SDV TSE.
sECcRei

| LE ePN MYO OFIE ALL 6 Cb be ee de Dea T
PO) RANOVIC A WUGISe



--- Page 149 ---
14-00000

. Secret.
oe ANALYSTS. REPORT ,
. ; Vor. Jaraslay-Kremel Mee, So : SS"E56u
oe ae
_- Pesan = . : : i . me
- . Tree OF oocumtmy ” Process: Sheet we on, , ape 63 Te ,

"Sr Ss oo oo
Dr. Jaroslav Krenel!s 3 (8-556u) Defection and 1 Redefection.

7-"—ReoUOlOlOlllllo
since & CONTACTS ls ety
We Le: Freund (S-3525)
“New York City

See Pfsnect f for OOA(S) - 3278987 filed in Jacket # 43525 (We Le Freund)
eee

Fon no. ggg teeaces rove 7-28 SECRET : , — : . ane

so mov sa ence way Be UstO.


--- Page 150 ---
14-0000

o gy, , _ LOM a? PPE, Fe
: { arqany cae te a _~, [ hy ve WY L2SFF

Office Memorandum . UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT).
_ ODE

TROM . "
1 oo. : \ .
sunject: Case: : {
. co . }
: ide 5 ty as yey: : ‘
. '
i
on emi tun
4. Above {
tay OSL propre
York toc
Ohne Cnar.ed :
2 i 8 %



--- Page 151 ---
Wojech
yy apous

2s nob

opportial t,
mean
rad to
ia wha lose.

0000-71


--- Page 152 ---
14-00000

,
i oo ; =~ _ ; os
J vot : an . ‘ .
j
;
:
. :

i z
ate ;
: : oo 2 Lorn
Sune steps
te Leni:
wore pla,
oy pho: :

negative)
at OIA

WES 22SS

ee



--- Page 153 ---
14-0000 . ~

: po ¥ i. ot : Sines

Ss

aprenred
hat subieih's Cf
article.

so Kinss
statenent

Qaars

reat



--- Page 154 ---
14-0000

gibies
wD gee



--- Page 155 ---
14-00000

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP

FOLO HERE TO RETURN TO SENDER
NAME. ADORESS AND PHONE NO.

FROM:

CONFIDENTIAL

. 237 Ure previous vaiioas a covtesare

. 140):
AMG OPE, 1961 Dw setae |

foam no.
2-6)



--- Page 156 ---
14-00900

YeXYX TEA
183 NYOR a ; . . . re
SECRET so mo a ; e
— WYOR CITE VA 57685 , a oo ee

2)

FROM SUFFCRT CSTETSON)

cRCUP 1 EXCLUDED eh A yan TIC. novncRADINS and “ pECLATS IFICATION. 2
eA 4 é

UAJECT2 WILLIAM Jo VANDEN JMEUYEL, PRESIDENT, netennaftosas AE gr

CCHMITTEE
le FCLITICAL neTHON GROUP, COVERT ACTION STAFF HAS HITT IATED A

Z MIM AS A POLITICAL
B CORCURRENCE IN THEIR CONTEN=

CLEARANCE REQUEST. ‘ON SUBJECT ft CRDER TO us
CONSULTANT. CA STAFF. WCULO APPRECIATE you
PLATED USE AND CONTACT. wit THIS INDIVIDUAL.

SECRET _
VA 97883 STETSON 1 UILLIAM Je VARDEN HELVEL A A CA HH=3991

oy aw: Jos /



--- Page 157 ---
14-0000

 QIRJECT. SPEAYS SWEDISH, ENTLISH, GERMAN AND SOME POLIT.

mevy “FA . ris, ol ; 7 f OD fe T :
SPOR EM =~. - , ~ ,
“A CITE NVCR S376 eS
QEEORT (TRAVIS) SOM MAJOR
iSE 39,873 wot Sor = .
aver s=rinrh Lis I 32 LA WEE LARSSON@LASERMV IST, BARBRS, Hit, _
“MARIAS INTE: NATIONAL _ RESCUE coMMTsEry stocuncl™y SVEDENS
AS FER REQUEST THE Four IN¢ IS ATO DATA ON SUDJECT. =
; 43
- Dosa 6: AUG 1918 POA SURAHAMNAR y VASTMANLANDS LAN, SWEDEN
125098 ELEMENTARY. SCHOOL, SURAHAMMAR,. SWEDEN |
19259301. PRIVATE SEONDARY SCHOOL, SURAMAMMAR, SWEDEN
1992-368 ‘wicK SCNCOL “wcHITLOC KSA SAMEKOLAN, ® STOCKHOLM
1$36-391 FRACTICE aT DIFFERENT HOSPITALS, STOCKHOLM , oe ;
1959-Atn . PRACTICE AS DENTIST ASSISTANT, STOCKHOLM : :
19s1h32 “EASTMANSINSTITUTET™ SCHOOL FCR DENTIST ASSISTANTS, }

STCCYHCLY: DIPLOMA
ya 3eaat EMFLOYED as DENTIST ASSISTANT, C3TERSUND
19Ah~h6s «YU SCPHIANENMET® NURSERY @SCHCCL, STOCKHOLM

oe 7 . oT

22776

@ JUN 06 MARRIED SR. MICHAL LISINS¥I, SCURNALGST, RADIC # REE SUROFE,

STOCYRCLE , 7

wousEY IFE VITH FOUS CHILDREN 10 1960.
JANUARY 196@ TO PRESENT, WITH’ ‘ENTERWATICNAL RESCUE COMMITTEE, 3TOCX@
WOLM, HUSSAND IS VICE CHAIRMAN OF POLISH REFUGEE COUNCIL IN QwEDENR |

i

FILE** CASE 37,75
src RET
GFN 6372 SUFFCRT (TRAVI5) MAJOR 27,873 BARBRO LISINSKT NEE LARSSCN®

GEFMVIST 2ARSRC HILMA MARIA PER 310 PATA DOB 6 AUS 1513 FO3

SURAHAMMAR VASTMANLANDS LAN 1925°25 1929-32 1932936 PUM IT LOC KSA SANS HO°

243 SEASTMAR SINS STITUTET® 1Sk 3044 COSTER UND

LAN 1936439 19551 194i

19haens “SOFHIAREMMIT™ 3 JUN &6 DRe SICHAL LISINS¥I 1960 1952 : 4

“RATS - OO FRPP E


--- Page 158 ---
14-00000

+ one

wrxy 7EA
=
srCRit -
° . a we
FRITY VA CITE NYOR 6396 we i
SUPPORT (FAUSEL) FROK MAJOR Me ¥
BUSJICT =~ WH-8582¢ wae MANDIN A TUVAL 4

_ SUBJECT NOT. IN WIS OFFICE UTIL 16¢¢ SUT WAVE LIVT MESSAGE AS
FER VA_$39474 SHOULD THERE BE ANY CONTLIST VE VILL CALL YOUs
mur- THTERNATIORAL RESCUE commITTEE Se SEY

ee eee

sre we To . TT ee

aN PRITY NYOR 6396 CFAUSELD MAJOR Mv-2587- UM, VANDEN WEUVAL NOT IN 1600

FER VA 55987 INTERNATIOWAL RESCUE conv iT TEE

st

19/1 Baa 7 MAY: ESS

od



--- Page 159 ---
14-0000

OYyry tA H

(MA CATE DYCK sont y, oss
“SC CONNTLE AND TMB: CYCUNTD FROM CALC, _
SS KE so, A 3702
. ‘soJECT LEO CHEDNEy. UNTERRATICSAL RECCOE CAM ANE te
aie

INFEUR &A 39377" AND fPENEAL CF FATS SMITE 200K TO Putte

- FILE = INTERNATIONAL PESCUE

“CEN NYC 39RT MECONPELL

el ae

arcu

ANSTITUTE. OF AMER Ica.

cy y SURELY TH

ep ren STR

IF YOU cane T SHIF TYE ALTE 300% END

RE AVAILASLES
AEE |

CONFUSE NTITAL
ar were) MAA IDE, LPC TY ERNE eae YA S937?

“DENTAL OF POLS CeBIT CHIT


--- Page 160 ---
14-0000

Chief Cogtact Division Oo 15 September 1961".

ATT ©: Support/EE/USSB

\

Chief, Los. Angeles Office

International Congress ow Education of ‘the Desf . en

gs 94 . A

= pase’ - S&S 10474
“LL Dr. Edgar Lowell, a contact of ours at the. John . .

Clinic, 806. W. Acams ulvd,,. Los Angeles 7, Callfornia, wi

7" prsat deal of electronic research ts carcied on concerning deafe

~

ness, bas advised us that he has been sominated as the Program
Chairman for the Liternational Congress on Bducation of the Deaf,
which will be held in June 1963. The liost for this Conference will |
bo the Coutcil on Education of the Deaf and the Congregs will be held
at Gallaudet College, Washington, D.C. The Coordinatgr for thls

Iuteyhatloual Congress will be Dr, Powrle V. Doctor of Gallaudet
Colifge, who will be working vith the State Departugnt on this par-
ticu ar Congress, S00 789 nd Clee... §” S56

. Chairman of the Program Comittee, Or. Lovell will be
required to go to Burope to attend a necting of a similar Buropean
group planaing their qunual coagress for about the same time, and
will visit Italy, France, Uclgium, Gersany, England’ end Scandinavia
to check on attendees. There io 8 possibility that he will also go
to Yugoslavia at the same tiwe. : ,

3. As a Gide-line it is also possible that D: » Lowell will go
to Moscow where lw will visit Prof, Z.N. Sokolov, ‘Institute of De-
fectology, Pogodina Str 8, Hoscow G-i17, USSR. Prof. Sokolov is
well-known and bas been active ia previous Macey Conferences in
which Dr. Aldrich and Jeck Ford have beco interested, Wo bave re
ported through Dr. Lovell on both Sokolov and Prof. A. ®. Luriya,
and continuing correspondence betveen Sokelov end Br. Lovell has
aleo been reported. :

4. The Soviots will be tnvited to this Congress and Lf tke
present cordial re'ationshtp still exists: unaltered by world events,
no doubt Sokolov andfor otheca will certalaly be laterasted 1£ not
attend chia meeting .

: a

ae
. e Het .

5, Baclosed is a rough outiine of the pregrse Dr. Lovell is
respaisfhle for which) of course, ig atill in the formative stage.
Aldy copy of tha original lebrer-sany-ont snucounciog the Congress
is attached, i Jade

——

5. We vould be interested 1 _ knowhag, vour degree of interest

_ dn thie particular matter, and entertdtn-ahy euggestions you might

have-Covards working with Dr. Lovell. : nas
Popey fica POPP, [E97

v SRNSY LELSACHER
Attach: Gutline of Program _

sBaldwiayoo t letter

¥



--- Page 161 ---
14-0000

he. SECRET.

ie

Shief, washington ofriso "1k Pep 62
chtaf, voatact Tiviatan (Support)

How Casa 37303

ted

. oa. eye is interested ty (Fuu) ~
secber of tha borlé fedarution’of tear. fy ab you
coatsst your, sources at “Galtadet Call : i
for aay inforsation they be? bcve OH Sesovic, who asecome
ing to a Les Angeles seccrandua of Lh sovebur 1961, 1o
Yugvelav aid vall-imoam os @ -ohaxnedan working in the
eres a’ the deaf. He mis appsrantly co-chaim:cn on a
committee with lr. Bernard ieyvoort, a Jesuit prievt, wie
dao PRD emt a 2 val 34 Tutah asbiumal. the te,
Megovie and Or. Yarvuort sot thgether in aid-cetuber Aol
: : “in Italy, at thich tine hapovi}d axpressai a cesize to.

‘ a dgvents a s Fox va .

: ‘2. agaist you tm the eaatgncent, ve are attaching oo,

i i : copy of the BE/YA seicraaiin af réquoat ond a coxy of the - 0 oo

: — so Los Angeles mecorantus of 1b govecber 1961, giving core . i
. avtedia about the meting betwoen Ir. Tervoort ami Masuvic. ;

|
1

"3. Gallaustet Collage will te hast to the Internallon
Ol Congress on Eéusation of the Paaf and suurses thera uay.
| Save iaformtiaa en the Mesovic in question. - .

i - 4. Meay thanks do ecvacce for your gvoperatia fa
: this eseignaem. Plenco furatsh iiformatica reepaelve
by OO-A sariss ‘Fepvrting. .

‘ : - 0. Baw. ABBCAART:



--- Page 162 ---
14-0000

ee USED RY DD/P X Bb/P IN LAOS x LAOS (SEE GRANT, SUPPORT X GRANT,

F ct

eM - ag f ~
eo
"BR CITE WYOR' T7149. me
STENTEF IC (WEST) FROM DANITLS 7 ot ove
te. RE.OUR TELECON VITH CUILL FeUILLy | oy
a. . . ts

# vo 74. 724.
PETER COMANDURAS. X 1 x PETER COMANDURAS,- SECRETARY cAvthAty anragto*
“RESCUE comurttey VILL CALL

¥. enED ICO": “CDIVASION 10N OF THE INTERNATION
—_—_—— ; a

ON YOU NEXT VEEK. -

29. REPEAT FOLLOVINS POINTS

A, HE ONLY VANTS ADVICE WHICH MIGHT RESULT IN FUTURE COOPERATION VITH

Be

Po ME HAS ALREADY TAL¥ED WITH TRACY BARNES ¥ TRACY BARNES ALONG

CENERAL LIFES.

Ce URWITTING TO NIM, ONE OF WIS HER, TOM REACAN ¥ TOH REAGAN, MAY

SUPPORT), AND

D, TOM NGCLEY X% TOM PCOLEY 15 ONE OF TKEIN ACK MONEY-CETTERS IN HIS

LAGS OPERATION, AND 13 DISSAPPROVED SY SO ¥ SO ¢2TE CROWLEY ¥ CROBLEY
FOR FILL IN.) THESE ARE THE CAPS IN OUR CONVERSATION XARLIER TODAY s

PLI2ZY

genre

oberon secrete.


--- Page 163 ---
14-0000

SUF 73

AMYOR CITE WA oetA3

FROM EE/USSR (PEAMS)

FOLLG:

4 . ”
Mt Is For yceur INFORMATION ; . aQ
=

fad

cS gt A STS YE.

ELLIOTT SEACH ACRAE Y ELLICTT. SEACH MACRAE, FRES IDENT OF Eo Z

“Pe DUTTON ¥ te Pe DUTTON WAS SRLEFED on 2e y2e- FEBRUARY IN “THE

~
re

msi's ¥ pEvI's OFFICE SY WALTER PFORIMEIMES Y VALTER PFORZMEIMER >

MESSRS. LOVERY AND vCEHNE CF OCI * ME

SMRYOCY OF CHE X suRYOCY CF CNE, AND REAMS FOR COvC CO. DDI:

WAS NOT X NCT PRESENT, SRYEFING VAS RESULT CF LETTER FROM MACRAE

To DCI IN WHICH HE NOTED HIS PLAN TO LEAVE 13 ¥ 13 HARCH FOR 200K

MINTING TRIP TO LONDON AND FARIS. . FCLLOUING THIS BUSINESS TRIP,

HE GILL SPEND THREE. C9 FOUR DAYS EACH IN BELTMADE, “SOFIA, BUDAPEST,

AID SUCKAREST

“JUST FOR FUN." IN LETTER TO OC], MACPAE AFPARINT=

SRS. LOVERY AND ¥CEMNE OF OCI, —

ty SOLICITED SUIDANCE 50 SRIEFING WAS NOT 7 NCT REALLY AN INTELLIGENCE

QUE RUT A MATTEP oF PROVIDING ANSUERS TO sucH SUESTIONS ASS

A)

CAL I tAve A TRANSISTOR RADIO AND A CAMERA INTO BULGARIA

SITHOUT HAVING THEM APPRCPRIATED?

THAT)?

(5)

cy

(oP)

fry

SHCULD I HAE A TYPMUS SHOT?
IS VATER IN SULSARIA AND RUMANIA POTASLET

WHG I'S THE “SHAXESPEARE® OF. BULGARIA (A TOUGH ONE,

YvAT TS THE USUAL ATTITUDE CF AULTAR TANS AND RUMANIANS

“ee

FF


--- Page 164 ---
14-0000

- ay IES: AND:

Te us VISITCRS?

PRORTREIMES pip TELL MACRAE THAT. VE’ yOBLT RE INTFRES
D PMANTAN Funels SHIns
ures er BOOK yg CATALCSUES w

pEAMS CANVASSED || CONSUMERS RE °
ESENTAT 108 BY NYFOs iT
ESRTEFING WAS woie>

ex TULTARTAN AB
Sn ANY POSTAL.
AFTER MEETING,
TREMEXTS FOR PR
eNO INTELL IG ENC

Eg MIGyT COLLECT

rE IRCN CURTAIN.

RTEPEST IN SusAITT ING REY

VAS AGREED, HOWEVER » THAT no ¥
aD, ALTHOUGH A DEBRLEF INS “On HIS RETURN WOULD SE DESIRABLE®s

strn un Nfs -

BUSINESSES and THEIR PERSCNAL” ,

PAWBons otanenttf


--- Page 165 ---
14-0000

Chief, Contact Division an 15 October 1953

For Support Branch,

ve

Chief, lew York office

Resident of Vienna, Austria - Possible DDP. Lead

'

. }
. . . . ‘

- _ A source of ours suggested that @ paul 1 Heber, Vienna, Bosendorfer ee}
- Strasse 9, who ‘works for the International Rescue Corcrittee, could be - r t

: '

|

1

i

helpful tous. SS SEF

SAY B. L. RSSVES

NuGrober:es : . .



--- Page 166 ---
4400000

daily
Budapest. Joseph Kovago and got

eg.

_~ GONFIDENTIAL..-

Chief, Contact Division . 20 Bovesber 1957
Chief, Wilnington Office ; wr | 57-408

Upon reading en article appearing ‘ina Wilningtoa
paper (copy ettaced Eton ex-rayor of

ing inforsation::

UDZp2 40m) Prise \Catater Ferenc Nagy vas asked by
of pe ttee to form a new Hungarian Comittee

whic wOl replace the tvo comittees now in existence... The

nev comaittes-is- being formed Decause the Free Burope Comittee

Ngehes to economize aid representation from several Iungarian |

‘political parties is waited. -
. .

3. "Since I donot dare: correspond vith friends and
relatives in Hungary and the US governnent ig interested in
current {information oo Hungary, I think I cen give the same of
ai individual who ie living in Vieans and is truly ao 'oparator.!
His. name 1a Dr. Pisena Pasetor. { believa he can te useful to

" the US beacause J recomeendad him for the purpose of gathering uaa
. {oformation on Hungary to Xr. David Martin of the International Soe
’ Reacue gone Saitted. Most of the information gatbered by Fesstor .

ry

Thc in reports. cb Rungary to the Unieed Notions.

- &, - Spasztor's ef@ress ia I. Jakobergasce 4,112.18, Vienna,
Avatria, telopnoos ‘§P2-0-455. I em able to give the fo.
piographic data on"Pasztort aged 46, divorésd, official of

the Pfeiffer Party after be wes kicked out of the Snsllnolders

Party, arrested for anticommaist activities in 19S8 or 1949,
He vas ccavicted and sentensed to death which vas later commuted
to life imprisoment. He vas in the same political prisons
with ms at Yac ani the Gyuto prison in Budapest.

5. ‘walle in prison bs vas a !Aouble-dealer' and most :

goners liked him but distrusted hia. Be seamed ‘to be eble =

75 find cut about all mews both inoide end outside the prison.
‘Ha vae ‘released from prison during the destalinisstion period
and escaped to the West during the revolution.

i
: :

CONFIDENTIAL



--- Page 167 ---
14-0000

‘
j
5,
+ . a
a. . ae

p Bungarisn: nevepapers « {wing bis re ; 4
6/16 financial straite acd eskod that I try ny . so a
i
i
\
.
oe 8. Sf cannot vouch for fia sincerity or loyalty but I would sey = I
that dout 95% of him $0 good ond the remaining 5% of him 10 questionable.”
9. Enclosed for your fetentioa ts the above-mentioned neve iasue :
| gnd you Gan use it for whist it is worth. We shali be gled to get more i
\ detailed ‘tnforuation if you wisb.. : '
. oF . . "ew I
{
I
i)
a - a
- 7 : , ‘ .
JJacobe/ime HUDSON D. DRAVO :
Attachments ao sbove | : !
i
i
'
i
1
!
1
4
, . i)
4 ee i
CONFIDEHTIAL :
. i
1
|
i
. 1
7 i
\



--- Page 168 ---
14-0000

<7» UNTERAPIONAL SSCUS COMMITEE”

t
f
oe 255 Fourth averse 6.44

New York 19, N.Y, -

Octodor &, 1959

Kr, James Hactrecken
Ylstey Foundetion, tno,
Se! . 989 Kighsh avedus.
. : Bev York, YY,

Dear Kr. HocCraakent

T thougst you would like to know that tho Taternstions! Resevs

- GCoantttes bse organisod s Comnisalon of Ai ctingngahed Americans
vis will visit Europe to dnvostignte the refuges af tustion and
fee a report on their return,

We enviston that the Comiopston's
Foport wid highlight ths following factors, .

1. Tho comitiona and needs of thoce Forgotten Mon who
_. Rave been sitting 4a refugese came for yoara or who
are inadequately resettled outaide of cams. A :

portion ef the report will bo devoted to the Rungarion
refugoes vio are oti1l in Cagpo,

2, Make specific and gonerat recomendations as to what

oan be done fn the future to mest tho neode of the
“Forgotten Mea",

Aside fron highlighting the fosters fact aanttoned, vo fool that
tho Commission's report

Can serve, among athers, the following
econatructivs purpo sea, .

1. By dramatizing ard husant sing tho prodlons of
Baropean Secapses, wo dbelfove that tha Comai seion

Gan dolp to create a climate of public opinion
-" gontucive tot

a Hore generous support for U.S, nrograna
concorned with tho refugoes, both private
and govérnzental,

%, More floxiblo inmigrstion legtelation,

2, Tho revert of the comnieston will
information from the survey now veing propered by the UFECR,
' Indeed, we fool that the Comntosion can be of greet sesiate
° : ance to the UNCR by bringing hie revert ond the refugoe
situation in genorai to the attention of the Ascrican

« Of coures, Incorporate



--- Page 169 ---
14-0000

public, We delfove that the comission Ls sepooially qualified -
“to fulfill thie function since they aro a group of private
| Ao ploaia’ ‘tabring te fellow Azericans,

“fhe Conia’ aaton ‘WAly lenve: for Burope on Cetober 1$th and retura

_ raport. will, 0 coures, alco reprocent intensive roesarch on
* “the part: of our staff,

Wo have ‘poked our overseas represontativos, in the countrios
which the Comniesion will be visiting, to vrovide at lesst ons
opportunity for reprecontatives of your organisation to cact
with the Counioston if they wish te do ao, If your reprosente-
tives desire to moot with the Comaission to discuss somo :
apecific sapect of the rofugse problea, I sucgoat that they
contact our representative in tha cowtry vhore they aro
otationed, .

T havo not been in a poeition to write to you about the Commfosion
deforo this cinco ths Commission plang bnve just been firalised.
‘If you deeire further 4oformstion, I om at your cervico,

Sincerely yours,
af Hobert J, Kachlioter

BYMjobe : : Exscubive Director.
Ene,


--- Page 170 ---
14-0000

_&ne Honorable

xr, John Alexandor-Sinclelr

Mr, imrold Zolierback, Chat raat - Lote 7
 Qbairoan, Executive Comalttoe, Crown Zollerbach Corporation

Angior Biddle Duke , Const raan: ;
President of tho Intornational Resous Committee
Former Anbaorador to Bl Salvador ‘

ghe Horerable Eugenia Andoreon
Yorser United States Ambassador to Deasark

My, Irving Brown . .
(. Busepesn Representative ef the A,F.of be - 6.1.0. ©

Or, Jane ©, Caray . .
, ntiat; Authority eo rotugoe affairs

Political Sefo

Mre, David Lovy ;
” “Heabar of the Now York State Youth Connisaien

Mr, Bugend lyons .
Senior Editor, Repdore Digest

rend Jama A, Pilon, pd,
Jobn The Divine,

ne Vory Reve
Hew York, 4.%6

Deon of the Cathedral of St.

" Gonnbenton Biagt:

Buropoan Director of the International Roscus Committee

Ne, David Martin
oo rtour


--- Page 171 ---
74-0000

f°) gate, Bew Yore Crflea

Vg gy oy tay
| \- oe ‘
i oa .

I oe _ oa ; a

I, -. Qiler, Contact Division mo, 21 June 1957

V+ yon 4 Alfen Branch (Steteon) :

BY: 1 tov Raven Resident Agent 7
"Heres set Chasgnse). 7 EO A/G
Guide Stu, Uperation Oculash !

[ Do . L. A EOE f.
7 too. 1. Gur attention was fovited by Mra. Steven Magar, —

‘ ‘ vlee president acd prozius director of the Litérrational fo gn yy
\ 4 Ruacue Cocaaittec (Ccrnocticut) to the (act that subject rd
H H drdividual acted uo secretary (olc) of propaganda at the
i : factory known ao Elektramos Veosuleek eg weromorv.sek Coyorn,

a tad Wt he fa Lew Tiving sonevbers iz the Hartfonl area.

a bow wiaed that whan he Firat vot to wigtrla he win 60°

: ttghtesed lag be Be refused enwy to the Us tnt when he
i, was webud vbether he had avy Crmuniat comnmceticus he said
: - he did pute : . .

_ B.-A check «with 1% WB tn Hartford indicated that .
} this man was bora 24 March 7923, had been under dsrcutigetion
3 so tack im Fabruary, thot the case wus closed, that the filo
io i - dndfeated he was again unter Lovestimtica ag of April and .
that the case wis evidently still cpen. It wes also .
indientad that he vas in the Dew Haven area, dut there was Lo
legal address aveilodlc.

3. FYI rs. basyar opined that felloss might te
deported, which indicates sha anove ne 19 eedoy lookcd overs
This information did uot come (ror ube .

CHARLES A. LEA

; Fidartani/jo

eRe



--- Page 172 ---
14-0000



--- Page 173 ---
14-0000 |!

. ag

» RO

ON - ghter, Kew York Field orrice
a = chief, Contact Division (alien) *

_ psa |
inclair - Suropean Director for. .

i a — ve

1 John. Alexanders

a. Hungarian Relief tor the International Rescue, ¢:
hi oe et

; _ Committee ; ‘
REF: “Your memorandum dated 14 January 19975 Subjects
> tnternational Rescue Comittee

| : . . .

I : In’ response to your request in the memorandum
\ . : - ehted above, we snitiated a name check on subject
HI os “ with Records Integration Division (RI), DD/P, hoping
Le . that you could tell your source we bad no derogatory
information on subject. As you know, any positive

|
|
i on information of this type obtained fron the pb/P q
i : cannot be disseminated outside the Acency. Althougn
| -: the attached roply, for she most part, is not
wry derogatorys we regret that you cannot pass it on to
, your source. However, it is forwarded for your :

information.

| a .
a So By My ASHCRATT

7 : : .
i St Enclosure 3
. _AS stated, above

sstetsonrbls

Distribution: .

2 - Addressee (w/encl.)

a _1 = Chrono (Alien)

" . : .,- NK. : ey
. : 1 = Index . a Ws? S

i
|
FILE: Leo Cherne



--- Page 174 ---
14-0000

a. Raference ‘ie.mads to the name check request from your office

“gated 28 Jenuary 1957, for information .concorning Jobs ALXIAKDSR -SUCLAIR.

‘The files of thia office and those of a predecessor organisatian onstain
fonsidareble information concerning Subject, the aajor part of witch is

- pot derogatory. ‘This inforsstion includss reports of Bubject's parcenal

views as of January 1943 on political and economic conditions in Shasighal,

- China, which could be made available to your office upon requset. Follow-

ing is information which. may be deemed derogatory in cons case and of intelli-
gence intereat ia the. other.

2. A usually relisble source ‘reported in September 1951 that Subject,

“then the director of the Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees and

an official at the British Foreign Office, accompanied ths Higt Comisasioner
to Italy on his first unofficial trip in July 1951. Source stated that
Subject was noi at all tactful in his ésalings with Italinn officials and

-. thus he wet pasoive resistance. Furthermore, acting on behalf of tha

Comaissioner and very eager to put at once aa mony British ageuts os peasible
‘into positions under the Commissioner's cover, Subject appointed Marvel

"BS BRAR, Chairman of the Interftiational Refugee Organization (IRO) Review

Board, to the position of représentative in Italy. According to Source,

this annoyed Prince DML DRAGO, Italian envoy to IRD in Gemva, Switeerland,
who stated that as. long as IRO wae functioning, there would be 20 other
refugee representative vorking in Italy end shat, after all, the Commissioner
bed to be first recognised by the Goverment. DS BEAR wes caid to bo ";zrscna
nen grata" to the Ttalens. .

3. According to a report dated 7 Jasuary. 1954 from e fairly reliable
source, it bad been reported by various sub-sources thet Jalm ALRZAMER,
British, Delegate to Italy of the High Commissiaver of the Unived Eations

‘Yor Refiyees, was @ parson to be considered rathsr politically dubiow.

Acecrding to Source, on eeveral occasions he had been exesasively taterestsd
in fuvoring foreigners in Italy who hed received expulsion notices as a
Tesuit of their commercial activity and political contacts with Iron Curtain

‘-countries. Source stated that Subject vas further reported.to co on very

rriendly terms with Italians and non-Italians who vere clearly oriented
toward the parties of the extrem: left.

CS cI-3743231 SECT; ‘
GA IR] ERRAay rer ryty

——_



--- Page 175 ---
14-0000

: ie rere sonrertis CAMPAICHe : .

2

a& CITE NYOR Siti |

SUPPORT FROM SWITZER ; , mo iy
. ; a

CATE nck Ff een La oe - ae

ae wy BE CF TWTEREST!
a SHORT” TIME AGO "OCONY_ PLEDGED: ‘BY, 000 X 8.5, 0090 TO ANGIER 8. DUKE 'S.

x angsgs Be DUKES “INTERNATIONAL RES UE -CGMMITTEE FOR ASSISTANCE

Av MAGARTAN ‘REFUGEES. At A FOLLOW-UP THEY ADVISED THEIR AUSTRIAN
ALIATE OF. THE: ACTION, THE REACTION FAON “AUSTRIA WAS THAT THE PLEDGE

. snouLD ak ITHDRAWN IRMEDIATELY OR IF THAT BAS NOT X Not POSSIBLE, THE
“+, FACT SHOULD NOT X CT BE PUBLICIZED.. “REASON FOR THIS KAS THE AN AD

“WAD APPEARED IN. TNE PARIS TRIBUNE SOLICITING FUNDS FOR THE IRC X IRC AND
STATING THAT THE MOWSY vAS TO BE USED FOR THE SUPPORT OF HUNGARIAN
PARTISANS FIGHTING AGAINST THE COMMUNIST GOVERNMENT (NO X NO HENTION
MADE TEAT IT WAS FOR ASSISTANCE TO HUNGARIAN REFUGEES IN AUSTRIA)« THE

(AUSTRIAN REACTION To THe aD wAS” THAT WHILE SUCK A CONTRIBUTION AIGHT

BE A GOOD DEA THEY DID NOT X NOY WANT TO BE ACCUSED BY THE SOVIETS OF
ACTIVELY supPORTING THE FIGNTIFG. SOCONY WITHDREW THE PLEDGE AND GAVE

“THE MONEY TO THI AUSTRIAN GOVERNMENT FUND TO ATSIST THE REFUGEES.

oe

goecey's REACTiCN yas THAT Inc x Ire eRoULD BE A LITTLE Kone | n AOSURATE
. _ ae¢.
y $ ase

Cpe an #1 a


--- Page 176 ---
14-0000

+ views as of Janus.

‘then the director of the Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees. and

Tor = oe : _ :
. Attention} Miss.Shirley Stetoon foo . . . i
FROM: —-Dopiity Director, Plans, , —

SUBTECT: \/ALEXAMDER-TCLAIR, John S ~

Leer ee ee mernren came F
et

. le Reference is made‘to the name check request from your office’
Gatee 26 January 1957, for information conee rning-John - ALEXANDER-SDECLAIR.
fhe files of this office and those of a predecessor organization contain
considerable information concerning Subject, the major part of which ia
hot derogatory. -Thio information includes reports of Subject's personal
G43 on political and economic conditions dn Shanghai,
China, which ‘could: be mada available to your office upon request. Follow- -
ing 1s {nformation which may be decmed derogatory in one case end of intelli-
genco interest in tha other, . os . ~

2. A veually reliadle source reported in Geptember 1951 thet Subject, :

an offictal ‘at the British Foreign Office, eccompanied the High. Commissioner
to Italy on his firet unofficial trip in July 1951. Gource stated that’ .
Subject waa not ot all toctful.in hla deolirgs with Italion offietale and —~._
thus’ bo met passive resistance. Furthermore, scting ‘on delwit of the
Commissioner and very euger to put eat cnca as many British agente as posaible —
into positions under the Coumigaioner's cover, Subject appointed Marcel — :
DE BEAR, Chairman of tlw: International Refugee Orgenizetion (IRO) Review

Board, to the position of representative in Itely. According to Sourve, 2 —
this annoyed Prince BEL DRAGO,. Italien envuy.-to IRO in Geneva, Switrerlend, ~ ~

_ who stated that as long. 2s IRO was functioning, there would ba no other
*. refugee representative working .
- Rad to be firat recognized by tl

Italy and that, after cll, the Commissioner
‘DE BEAR woo said to be "persona

Bon grate” to the Italians.

3. According to s report dated 7 January 1954 from a fairly reliabla-

. gource, it had been reported by. various sub-sourcen thet John ALEXANDER,

British, Delegate to. Italy or the High Carmissiover of the United Nations
for Refugeva,° wes & person to be considered rather politically dubicus.
according to Source, on several occseions-he had been excessively interested
in favoring foreignare in Italy who hed received oxpuleion notices as o .
result of their comercial activity and political contacts with Iron Curtain
countries. ‘Source stated that Subject vas further reported to be on very
friendly terms with Itclians and non-Italians vho were clearly oriented
towird the parties of thy extroma left. .

CS CL-3743232



--- Page 177 ---
14-0000



--- Page 178 ---
14-0000

J}

+
i

4

Tore toa Tet.
of waich, acess ding
ident Mixvo uring .

ation entitled “Livre foir".
4g Book egainat Diem, @ COPY
vas given to Vics Pres:
t to saigon.
of the book va

{ttle to say by way of — .
dai Viet stateneute, du ‘perrier
kes © ! é 101 Hoan and. bis people. He says
thet in time, aither Aoaa watete vill wio gut in Vietnam ap
chat 1? Hoan ‘ving, po wikl need 4 couple of fries da the UG. Tne”
tmplication roens plain that du Ferrier plans op boing one of -those

“priends”.

-It seems to us that the best course 02 handling thio uaterial to to
pond the whole baten tc you is order < doternine whéther oT not any”
of it 16 yvortr repor.ing oF placing on file. we will furnish report
‘glemeuts for ery of whis gatertal waolch 19 found reportabdle. - If you
find that eopive of B2an's letters B they could
possibly de tbtained from du Berrier 6% euch tizes as he io in New:

York. |
Charles A. Lea

' GpRoss: mk

- Bnelosures 83 stated



--- Page 179 ---
14-0000

3..

5.)

"was. in part or wholly financed by CIA. The Oram Agency has arranged
distribution for shovings in Fortisa.ani Korea. The Oram Agency has

. 7 OM
Chief, Contact Division
McConnell a
Chief, New York ‘fetes :

‘Our contact inthe ‘yarold 1 ore Ags pubiie relations office advises.
that a-Mr. Rufus PaYItipy-wis Connected with psychological warfare
activities. of the. Agency, has been in contact with Oram and bis agency
for the irpose of arrdnging distribution of a fila which was made in
Vietnam and’ is concerned’ with the Comminist methods of operating in an

‘Agrarian community. Palllips was formerly in Vietoad under cover. |

‘Our contact. further advises that one John Gates, o former neuber’ ‘of

~ CIA in the Saigon station, was used by Oram ad. the narrator for the

movie at a recent private Showing. This same John Cates 1s reported

by’ our contact to be extremely indiscreet insofar as security catters

are concerned. Our: contact “18 somevhat concerned that Gates vill

inadvertently re ‘that he. (Peter bhite) was connected with CIA

while he was i etnan. Petor"S ex~erience vith Gates’ indescretion

dates back to:his visit in Vietnam at vhich time Gates told his girl

friend about vyat Peter as doing. (7ais has been previously reported. );
Lt- LES: 5 GS ~— TLE Y ak

sete Gates ie now ‘vorking part-time. for the ‘International Rescue Committed?

ne enema to

eS. SE Z
The film” “ah Shestion vtech bears the title “The Fire and the Shadow”

had professional movie makers take a look at-it for possible shoving
in: the US. The professionals vere highly critical and completely
discouraged: any attempt. to have it distributed in the Us.

ve ‘assume that Eesdquarters 00/c vas aot advised of this out of channels
approach since the NYFO had not received any word of same. As you know

. Harold Oram and bis Agency has been a contact of the BYFO for many
: years.

ee . Charles A. Lea



--- Page 180 ---
14-0000

: te aid
fi. 6 <4

; Chief, Contact Divieton. - 1b Jaquary 1957"

: _ ATEY . : Aliva and Support Branches fo, :

=~

“Chtet, Bev Yor’ office . . . oo oe v
Intornatioual, Reseua Coniutttes £08 of 5d).
se - fl: ds :

“|. We have “just recently recotved'' ‘a letter fron Mr. Leo Cherie of
"_gubject committee, advising us that their Buro;cdi Mrector,
Me. Joseph Buttinger, io returning from Austria and vill no' Se
os ae a longer be in charge of the Hungarian Relief. jis also pdvisess J a

A: 4 that they have-just appointed Mr. John Alexaniér- Sinclair ag/
: - 4 : Buropean Director for Hungarian Rolie.” ‘Attached please find
a 2 photostat of the resumd of Mr. Alexander's experience and back=

ground. . oo

Sp : @. Wild you please cee that this information 1s made available to
those porsoos in the Agency, who might be interested.

3. We quote one’ paragraph -of Mr.: ‘Cherne' 68 letter to us, and if it
k . du within the realm of poevibility, we would appreciate any 6d-
sn vice you aight have.

ie 4. = "Just as a matter of formality, however, and since the arraage-
: . ment will be reviewed in @ matter of months, I am anxious to

: know whether there miy be any reason to feel that our haste was
A . unfortunate. At the sams time I do wish to advise you of hia

‘ Lo appointment end that his headquarters vill be in Vienna. I an
: enclosing a copy of his summary of background and would appre-
I: : ¢iate hearing enything from you that seams relevant.”

} ; : oO . Charles A. Lea

i CCMA jor :dp
i ‘Enclosure



--- Page 181 ---
14-0000

AAS

CE

COMPIDEVTEAL

January 11, 1997

Tos we ; . . .

. “oCentral. Intolliguace Agency . t, ote . ”
attentions fire Carl Martin ; : : ; : ”
Subjects | Inforration ‘on pefoction of North Koreans in Hungary

“to thg Side of the Hungarian Froedom Fighters °°

The. partaest haa received information fron-a source in the
‘ $ional Rescue Comittee that sone North Korcans. resident
in Rungary..defected to and sided with the’ fungarian Freédom Fightorse

Three recent Hunrarian rofugees, reported eyewitnesses to these
ow ident in the United States, 43 follosas

defections, ara Do
— MAA LES

eT] a Thomas Orley, ‘iho Gan be contacted through the

a - International Fescuo-Comittes, New York _ oe
Teaon 2. James Anbory presently atudying at Bard colleges - Yh s as

+ -—Tannandale-onstlud ony New York _—_——-

Je Sgaba Gall, presently studying at Bard Colleges —

; AA Rima o-an-Hudsons New York

Yhe Department 1a very mach interested in additional informas
tion on this subdject,: for oxarples ‘Who vere those who defected?
(Students, industrial trainees, members of government missions, etce)
How many defected? How many are known not to have defected when
- given the opportunity? (In other words, how widesproad were defece
. tions?) If defectors had any important positions, information oo
eons and positions is desireds what were the circunstancus of
tne defection? what appesre:| to be the motivations for defection?

would also be interested in inforaation, if
er and type of North Koreana in Hungary or

The Department
rable, -on the numb!
other Satollites.

Ve would appreciate your nandling this on a priority baglse

Stanley E. Smigel
Chief, CIA Liaison Branch
Pivigion of Acquisition and Distributica

4 Sony A &
ep at! wd
\ COuFIDS wPIAL


--- Page 182 ---
14-0000

577°

ES NAAT PRIORITY Men T9gz_
oy .
7 % > 7
PRIORITY
:
CONF U2 es
NOUS CITH-WA 12868 x :
HAYNES FROM SELANEY co :
= MoUs e54 X 894 a 7 a Lt
REN, UE HAVE TO TAME THE SANZ POSITION ON THIS REQUEST AS UE 20
WITH ANY REQUEST TO PASS DERGGATRY INFOR RUATION TO SOURCESe AS YOU
“yi VE CAN'T PASS ALONG ANY INFORHATION THAT UE MOULD CET FROt
| SECURITY FILES BECAUSE OF THE FACT THAT HUG OF IT CcHEs FROM THE
— SUQURITY OFFICES OF OTHER ACENCIES, ALSO A LOT GF THE DOPE IN
SUCURITY OFFICE FILES 1S COMPLETELY UNSUBSTANTIATED AND ITS USE IN
A CASE LIXE THIS COULD CONCEIVASLY DO A DISSERVICE TO AN ORGANIZAq
“Tlot. 1 SUGGEST AS VE DO IN ALL OF THESE CASES THAT YOU. REFER YOUR .
LOCAL GROUP TO. THE LOCAL FYI X FAL. IN THIS WAY THEY CAN GET DETTER .
INFORMATION THAN We COULD SUPPLY, EVEN IF WE EERE ALLOBED TO PASS IT
* ALONG. : a
1/37952 _ a ;
- oe :
peer t «f

eee
Abinalival hice (omni ekue. S : wr .



--- Page 183 ---
14-0000

: :
er
:
!
:
i ;
i :
| !
i 4
. : ie j
7 i - fo 4
: : j
4

t



--- Page 184 ---
14-0000

30. RCREMANIS IPs Vay
TRS BAVY 278 BY

’

/¢(802535 ASKED///

ORLEY IaTve
- ~- Oe .
BEY YORE JANUARY 1S<-Oiet GF MUNCANY'S LEADING ATHLETES
VEO FOUSHT 58 THE FAEKSN ALVOLY SAYS GORTH KURTA, COMGNIST
CHIAESE AND VIET WIM STVOENTS VERS amwts TEE syHPATHIsces Bt
THE STRUSGLE ASAIRST SOVIET INTERVENTION LAST FALL.

Ia ah ISTEAVSEY HERR TOQAY, FOAnta FENCING CRANPION TuORAS
OOLEY RECALLED TRAT °PRACTICALLY EVERVGHS HOT INVOLVED In Test
ACTUAL FICHTING® LEW? SUPPORT BEHIND Tuk SCEEES To TRE FREEDON
FIGHTERS. HE COULD BOT RECALL SPREIVER BEtalss OF THIS “Passive
HESISTANCE® GLAWSE AT THE TSAE AE GAS TCO BUSY TENDING GFF SOVIET
TROOPS os YAINS CITA SHALL ARNS.° BUT ACCORDING TO THE 95-TEAR
OLD BEFORE ATHLETE A STUBGIT, Tet EDE-UAS DEREUITELY Fen ragEDeN
coGILy THE OVERPOVERING POSSE GF SOVIST AREER AND ARTILLERY
IZIBFORCERENTS HASAGED TO HOLD GP THE COmMNIST PUPPET RESIIC.

WHEN YES PIEST Wave OF Tuk AXVOLT CHOW CUT Ia SUDAPEST,
ORLEY aS GH LZ40E FROe TRE EWIVERSITY AT 28 OLYMPIC TRAIHINS cae
lu TATA. HE SAED KE ASD OTHER ATHLETES AT THE CAEP REAND THE eV
oF THs FICHTINS OVER VESTERD RADIO BROARSASTS. IT CARE JUST
BSTORZ THEI SCHEDULED RETURY TO GUDAPTST. GOSLEY AWD SOM OF THE
OMA ATHLETES JOINED VEE PREEDGH FIGHTERS AS S008 AS THEIR
OLYMPIC TEAM SESS ESTURIED To BIDAPEST. THE ATULETES WERE exTvance
YO THE CAPITAL TO PREPARE Fea stpaaTuRr To TS avsTRaLiaa

SOLYNPIE GARES.


--- Page 185 ---
“ee yOURS. peegar’ -w SAID BOTH TRE aveneeta a.) BbaneEs

SATICIPATED THs SBRC ) GRILALINY C7 THE SOVICT. VeOO78. it) Bar.y

| novERBED,. B83 PETE: earectas CLates THAT THE Parra covineent
was | BES OTIATIOS roa. ren OFTEDBATAL :

‘THE sTuveats PREPARED ven ns seeeug poe 07 prany iis OTH

~ sma Anns COLLECTED rion THs BELITARY ARFORY rt) ‘tae veCToalts rf

“ext mason seueck GF SUPPLY, GRLEY ROTTED, wag A *s0*

“cal: Lanp yee tenye yroe, waren TH vonasas THERGELVES | TOOK TRE

Anns THR vesEDon visuTens REEDED» : ‘ at mo

Jn THOSE “rice pays “ pervena BOVERBEB 4 ap By OaLSY RECALLED,

THE SHYKA WIGHT OF BEL OPER A TROUSAND SOVIET TANKS rants THE TIDE.

aE $alDd “BO PSORTEES y NO RATTER nev SUAVE Cas au @Oy VITA SALE.

‘some agAlNST HEAVY ‘ADMOR.°

BY BOVEHSED 16, THE ‘yous yasepon piste ane “ais CLASSHATES
DISCOVERS THAR THE SOVEETS HAN TAKEN OVEA RANY OF THE BALAcaD
STATHESS. HZ SATd ons gupEniDee OLTH TEE consimtsts Gesiv LHCKD
June THAT REPORTATIONS HAD SiGus, AMD ER AAD A FRIED pec DED 10
TAY TO ESCAPE. . 7

OaLkY SalD TH3S VAS A PIFFICBLY BREISICN FoR. HIM see aust o7

“nts FAALLY. 8% VAS RSPeC TALLY BARD TO say coonerz ™ als varnge

Sines. CRLEY'S Tee. BROTHERS HAD ALSO FLED AUSCARY 28 1947 -OKE

” 99 BOLEUEA AnD THE. OTHEA Te ASSTRALZA, YEoras’ FATHER eas
“ FORRERLY A BORLD CRANPIOR SHEET SHOOTER, A & Fag daa FoEuD .

RARSHALL Ia THE mss ABTA Aawy aap @ Lzenta ta NE yon-conntai 8?

PRIKHOLDERS PARTY. “pepaus® oy mis BRS PAACD, THE commamtsTs aad

reece gin §BTS A HARD FASTORY JOO DESPITE HI3 AD VASE IES. | eons.

bo waren SHAY 1S OED ATER Te REVOLT, THAD SAID ue .

\pptgy THR CORMMTSTS WORLD ERTALIAIS. GURFES THE 7A0NS | evenes oe



--- Page 186 ---
14-0000

- CONmEISTS Hag Be;

Ab Berens

A asien Loon at TEE»,
THR. YouNs QxTuGeE

. 63 Bla ar 1g oO VERS 1 :
> TUE COMMDLATS: HAD. Fouud. oRANT: DLAC MARES ° Ag ATEST aia 18

MOvOUT WE APE

a VEN* YEAS Rec ens: Coveains ALL PHASES oF AIS DAILY: AcTavivies-

“40R TRIPS apneab WITH THE yENcle TEAS ro COnvERS AT Ions ta
" FAUBANT3» : pe

AN YOUNG CBLEY'S VIEV, IT VAS GALY BECAUSE RE HAD! VOR THE WORLD

zias CKANPL ORS MIP at CAkROAA, ITALY In 1930 an” BECAUSE
4aB atPT UP. MIS STUDIES AS @ BADLY HELSED STUDENT: or PHARMACY

wT ACTION HAB GOT BEEN TAKEN ACAINST RIP,

At THE. “That: ORLEY “AND HIS FRICHD BICIDES To xaaL FOR Yat BCROTA,
: THOSE

TALS SOs , OCORUNSARTANS ALREADY. had FLE0 To AUSTRIA:
5 MAD LIVER NEAR ZHOUSH TO THE BORDER BNgy THE LAND AND MASE

LIBR VAY 7O-FRECEOM.VITH-LETTLS. OPPOSITION. BUT.OTHERS -RAD TO

Ask TRELR VAY FROA BUDAPEST. ;

Gi ROVENSAR ‘is, THOMAS AND BIS FRIDID BFESSED IN vorsnes
OTe ISS AND PAMACED. To pose A RAISE OF THE FEY TILL
-ABING TO TRE VEST. YHEY TRAVELLED 19 Tat FI8sT Teva OUTS I0£
DAPEST WITROUT BEING STOPPED. ‘THERE, THEY HITCHED A AIRS VITH
TRUCK BSIVER WHO WAS NEADTD roe THE BEQDER AND ASHED BO
aBTIORS. ALTHOUS THEY weak STOPPED °S$23 OR SEVEN TImzs® OF

aE SCVIET SOLDIERS THEY TeameLice vive THE TRUCH To VITHIN 30

TMS OF THE Eogore.

yCR THE FIMAL STSSTCM THE T¥O BSC AP IRS STROLNTS PERE JOINED

“0 A YOUNG COUPLE. . ALL FOUR OF THEA TRAVELLED BY FOOT FoR Two

caYs TO COVER THSa LAST 30 nis.

YOUNG OCRLEY SAID THR BIKES BAD GLEN REEQYED VOOR THE GORDER,
KUT SETSEEN THE @ATCH YOVTRS a9 Sur eoccwa age FT steeme eo



--- Page 187 ---
14-0000

Titag vas a pasctiog, “Saw starten @F cexp gitiia’ Mey 8 ait %%
 gnot, AS THR FOUR banat ecness Tit LAST. ¢PTs. STaKTCH, sor BANS , ,
Out. + TRE VOuNS VOMAN IM THEIR PASTY NEVER BLACKED THI AUSTRIAN

“GITE. CORLEY SAID THEY TRIED 70 Fin OUT vurTIZR she HAE
| ATEN SILLED. DUT VHEM Toe aUSToLANS RELarEE TeeiA lueRtES, THE
CormuuilsT GUARDS DEMTED THEY Wad FIRED A SINcLE EHOT, :

\ : vet
ALL Akos THEY e ise apt Route, oncgy ‘RECALLED, TARNtS: AND
VOLPERS, viRTUALLY VATNOUT RICTPTION, Tow tare. vaiew Pos vree.:
SATEST aud WHERE THE SOVIET SOLDITRS VERS STANDINT SARE.

i

ome youre ATHLETE “WILL AEvER FeRcET KI3 FEELING* ON. REACHING | :
AUSTHIA ALIVE. IT TAs AS. i A eecat ROCK Wat FALLEN FROM MY
WEAGT AND-EYERVONE COULD HEAR THE THUNDER, HE 3410, -

ONLEY CONSIDERS MIRSELF “LUCHY* TO HAVE A CHANCE TO AUILE
7 BEY LIT [8 THE 4.3. On HIS TRIPS ABRCAD JITHX THE OLYMPIC
Ttkny HE SAID, RE HAD HEARD MUCH ABOUT THE noDreN, pRoCRESSt¥E

WAITED STATES, QUT VUAT HE BID NOT sieU BEFORENAND, ME EUPLATAED,
“Ag THE WONDERFUL FREEDOM OF LIFE MERE." °1.CAN SAY THAT I .

“NOOSE ABD WEAK AT VHAT I CHOOSE,® CALEY POINTED CUT. *IF 1
daXT TO TRY-TO BECOME & RICH RAN, 1 CAN DO IT, IF I PREFER To LIVE.

< QUILT MODEST LIVE, 1 Aa BO THAT TOO,"

THOWAS. 15 TEPPORARILY VORRENG vitH THE LHTERBWATIGHAL RESCUE
“DMR TYEE od 178 HUNEARIAN REFUGEE AELINY PROGRAM, Im FEBRUARY,
“E SOPES TO BESIS STEDTIES CHRRISTRY AY TH CALIFORNIA INSTITUTE
SF TECHNOLOGY. EANUNILE, HE WAS CONTACTED THREE OTHER aUACARIAN |
JLWMPLE ATHLETES BRO AAR $0 YER U.S, TOSKTNKR, THEY PLAN TO

“ORR A NEV F2HC IRS TEAR PO2 ORICH SPORT RATHER THAN 19f0L9CY
‘AML BE THEIS LasPsaavion. Ife


--- Page 188 ---
14-0000

. 4
HEADED BY CENERAL WILLIAN BoNCvAN X WILLIAN DONOVAN FORMER HEAD oF

DOING BUSINESS. DELANEY silouto HAVE ‘NADE THE CHECKS WHICH DISCLOSED

- : ‘e 3 ‘2
ESE NRI6 ROUTINE 4117852, 7
“CONF 328 foe: gE Ee ge
. To, an = 4
HOUS CITE WA 8298900 a |
a - ne - SO am 2
: / : py 4
MOORE FROM DELANEY re 2 ae ga |
. . . . et tt - . _ ™ :
< 4 |

; fic MOUS e51°X ast “rorya otsricari6 HERE IN EADQUARTERS
oN THE INTERNATIONAL RESCUE COMNITTEE, DISCLOSED THAT THIS OUTFIT 18

oss X OSS AND HAS DEEN OF ASSISTANCE TO Us’. Ins SEVERAL RESETTLEMENT
CASES. WHILE THIS DOES NOT X NOT ANSWER YOUR SPECIFIC QUESTIONS AND
EVEN THOUGH WE NAVE NOT X NoT CLEARED THE OUTFIT PER SE IT DOES ;
INDICATE THAT THE ‘irc K Rc is ‘A RESPONS IDLE CROUP WITH WHOM WE ARE

THE ABOVE BEFORE SENDING OUT HIS INITIAL RESPONSE TO YOUR HOUS £54 xe

bo) Oe

; ; : |
41798442 . - - |
: ; o ; |

;

FE 2) Oo an



--- Page 189 ---
14-0000

‘s no Pgh

ESY whod PRIORITY GEIL 1996107 Wo DTGe 00195302

‘pRIORITY

SEC”

va CHE Wous eSt a |
ou _ 7 oh
:

coRIDEN ri HAYES ; wom , : _

. i
CAN ‘you TELL us UNETHER OR N oT THE INTERNATIONAL RESCUE ,

COMMITTEE y INC, x, INTERNATIONAL RESCUE COWRITTER | INCeg 62 uEST !
ea !

4S STREET X 62 WEST 45 STREET) NEW YC! aKy IAS: TEVER. “BEEN CITED FOR, |

OR SUSPECTED OF, LEST IST. LEANINGS?
HUNGARIAN RESETTLEMEST BANTS ADVICE.

LOCAL ChOUP CONCERS ID WITH | ;
AS TO Nov TO REACT TO PROPOSALS .

OF THE COMMITTEE. |

HO TOTs 10/45322
Es TOTs 10716822.

Rane tenet nena es TT



--- Page 190 ---
14-0000

aot

©" Conttdenthal.

Meno to the “Hes

an Subjects Statots ato of # Jan a .

Bo tee ee }

Dux Fractically the sano roquiremant that ia contained dn the

attachod merio. had Previously boon rocoive: fron OCR ‘as an USIA rorutrenont.

On the latter we told CCR (sturdits): that sinco tho nanos: of ‘tho _poople :

given \ wore not their, correct. nane= wo could not tako action on tho ‘requirement ”
: since wo néod the right nanes to ret. an BI elearanco. USIA later told OCR <-->
to consider the re: suirenant withdrawn and USEA would contact the trea. paoplé. aie
I tol °migol#s office of the USIA business and gugrosted that they contect _
USIA oneo it woul d look bad for all of-us to bo ‘contactdnss the cos

three’ ;Pooplo about: the sano thing. “Smt igol fa office wld do so. I told ‘

Carl ‘yortin of ‘the above dovelopnenta and ho took an autoatat copy of | State ts

“~~ * “memo to Camp Kilmer, 9

“Wha - "
“Settee b& Miniu cw ae

jee. # Ma aged Meat « we Ceul.
ff - a

oe Ag peitov , at

y



--- Page 191 ---
14-0000

a a en pa

BACKGROUND INFORMATION. .

on ‘a
: Titttyae bt.
-TAPAK, Gustav

- |coum tar oF vies a
j -Gernany —

_ June _29, 1952

* “Belvedere House, 5%6 Weet :11z Street

; SENERAI New York, NoYig UsSede | oo _

nade ah ADOREEE OF ‘SPONFOR . . . a

| Laura Wood Roper, 34050 Street, N.¥., Sgshington, U.Seae |

PGjAGe ABILITY Sbvak, Czech, Geraapioree ~ ~ = OS
some sngligh_ ; : Miller

way STC! ag PUMICHTED ?

mucation ° : . .
Elewentary school, professional school,

oF Tr

Mr. Tapakts village was in the area whic ¥as completely destroyed during:
World ar. II by the Russian argy. His family lost the mill and the fara. —
At this time he was in the Czechoslovakian Arm, because he did not want

to be a farm worker at.a "colchoz", so he decided in 1952 to escape. while
_ he wes on guard ina border battalion, he crossed ‘the border and came to
_Bavaria.s :

» at
ad


--- Page 192 ---
14-0000

! -tEC

aA CITE NYCR 350.

SePPORT (CONNELL? FRSY YAVCR -

YL
we oy A Hors
CASE 19830 -X 1>330 syastsT. PETER.» HITE,

fae ao .
ngage Tex Le Leaves TH

cater govt Ter cat

ee

ae Ove AT TEL ANT MAT Linn GaANTs TeeCe

eae O NTE

If LOOKING Fox A atPENTE VENTS ES

SUBJECT :AT ATKING THAT DAVE

HIYA? S008 bo psTisLe ANCE HE HAC Te SELIVER IT. HE .CULD ALES
LIKE. CETTLER T, aeTuaN THE TICKET *TUS Toute ae toga U0 CONVEN TENT “;

AS WE MAS TO H HAVE. IT IN Gavka TG YARE CLATY FCA HI TRANEPSRTAT ION

AM GOVERNENT.
h wel

7 subsist AEPCATS “THAT THE NETLONAL CATHSLIC aELPARE G2 ROANIPATIC 13

EXPENSE FAM. THE VIE

STEPPING uP THEIR AELIEF ACTIVITIE? IN VIE TAY BEGINNING NEXT QARTERe

THET PLAN TO 0G At nucH IN ONE QUARTES AM HEY Raa DONE, iN) ONE YEAR
_ PREV SOUT Ove _ SUBJECT STATES THAT WONSIGNGA RAANETT Te AD uty THAT
RAPPORT BYT.EEN THE Ue*s OPEAATICN® * “£5 TaN AND THE MINISTER FOR
BEFUGLES In THE VIETNAP ‘GOVERN #ENT aat VERY PCLA INDELD« HAXNETT

Ie RETURNING TO VIETNEY EVTNER NEXT GEEK CA THE. cEER AFTER.



--- Page 193 ---
14-0000

SEC sas ;

TANG CITE WA 7521 3
; ts
ELLY FROM SUPPORT (CONNELL? =
be, by
QO=2—}4- - oS “LY :
> S w
REFERENCE YOUR 13K 13 AUGUST EKO RE POSSISLE CONTACT yITH
CEN, O*DANIEL CHECK WAS ADE ITH THE RESPONSIBLE DO/P OFFICESs
THEY APPRECIATE YOUR INTEREST OUT PREFER THAT YOU NOT DEQRIEF THE

CENERAL ON HIS TRIP TO VIETNAM. THEY HAVE REASON TC QELIEVE THAT
THEY. WILL GET A COMPLETE CODY OF HIS REPCRT. _ : oe



--- Page 194 ---
14-0000 2

see ge
“aa CITE NYOK 3610 ~ oe on ts :
ALIEN CHUSULIN) FHOM RINKUS : . pee =- 4
: .. oN 5
£,

a

a aE CASE 19287 X19.89 co oS . ZA
THEATER GULL3, eMIcH ‘puts oN JTHE us STEEL Koua, SEEMS To HAVE AN

INTEREST. 1” ‘PaETENTING 47 ONE ouR Ww xv ‘PROGRAM ON THE TAUPSE

SALLORSs THEY. HAVE MADE PRELIMINARY INQUIRIES am cyuacn woatn J- 7557

ra

SERVICES. THE-INTUIRIZ® VERE MADE BY DICK SALZ¥AN XK DICK SALDHAN 7% CMY
“Wie Ts on THE. ING ¥ IRC STAFF. TALZHAN STATED THAT AN IRC MEMBER ane
paint
IS ALSO ON THE THEATER CUILD BOARD 1% THE GRIGINATOR OF THE IDEA.

a Ssee . . oo .

foe, THIS APPEARS TO BE AN EXCELLENT OPPURTUNITY FoR PROPAGANDISTIC ; be

; |” DEVELOPMENT. PERHAPS SOMEONE FROM THE GOVERNMENT SHOULD PROVIDE
mo : 30RIPT MATERIAL: eNICH WOULD BOTH ABTOLVE GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES AND
_ " PROVIDE THE PRGPER PROPACANDISTIC SLANT OF SHOWING YHAT HEELS THE ;

SOVIETS ARE. GUCVEANMENTAL COUPERATION MAY BE APPROPRIATE FROM
“CANGTHER ANGLE. IF THE IDEA I* ATTRACTIVE TO ‘THEATER’ GUILD AND BEGINS

TO CNOsBALL INTO A PROGRAM, NO X NO ONE @LLL TKEN LE AWLE To STEER '
THEN. THEREFURE, THE GOVERNMENT SHOULD CéT AS HUCH BENEFIT AS POSS ISLE

FROW THE PROGRAM BY COOPERATION.

“AT ANY RATE, Let?s MAKE PLANS AZ TO How THE IDEA Is To BE HANDLED
Wy It Is FORMALLY PRESENTED TO US THROUGH CHURCH WORLD SERVICESs WE
WILL HAVE TO HAVE QUICK ACTICN IN ORDER To KEEP UP sity IRC X IRC AND
THEATER GUILD WHEN THEY GET ROLLING.

wR Sys , - ; _


--- Page 195 ---
14-0000

stews toe e O4

car Offic Memorandum UNITED STATES covekaiteNt

BY

“i

- cater, Contact Diviaton a DATE: 6 March 1956

- Support Brari¢h |
Chief, saa Francisco: ortice

Honolulu ‘Reaident ‘Agent :

suayecr:: ~aeternat ional “‘Rerugee Organization, (iho) shazeiat >

The attached comménts on the ro fn Shangtat may be of
interest to the bo/e. They vere sddressed ty cecil Bvart,
159/3 Mowming Lu(s), Shanghai, China, in a letter, dated
26 Feb 56 to his brother =< Bvart, Kauai, fT. H.

F338

“Sz

© ndtlak

M. C. CHEEX

“ petachment © ~

- oe
oe y fy 4?
ey a Se a

eye (Sts 3 . ig


--- Page 196 ---
tiffa weer, Phere f &e. (20k he faurr Rave a.
YO emeol Caer fuk aa bp oe YR! Ov one accoretsol £0.
foc hte j i Koae & Korte of Herm corn ween o~ ‘

vie, ferbiteca,. lar, lerclerr + mestitnts open, alien,
. 5 ‘ pa ce hat and cho ole her Hest for hen “ ;
CE DeRteaseg win Lang wean Ane ele fore Coin LD fe 2
 nesettsnent’. UE there 4 ayant hoyle aden Me aut
back ink occasenslly get tumk lechbote. thir
other nour there. 2 wih frur emainang. FAr.
J. QC otateot or (94 bhba Pprht eamt ac
Nant ane 1950, 7 thigh nt war a Fodrencl a0 Paho
Consiclene me rohf dare an @ aeunol dele.

| a are er 7 DP He Bointinl oak dat


--- Page 197 ---
N “Hse 7 ; 2 say

Fram voce tanageanised ecGun of witha. a. Cn. snk ‘a6 thins
angrell mov hae foodeoms Caw Ye lacemtinl to hare. ti

Airs unl of 4 premrsert Yam chu F not Lp AE bo
phitr beg 2k fag ida ner ant amen therefore “14 tha

ealhnitanr m4 eff. fom eee
pout wot burertat eth. neh oh. olay AG avck p ve
Left me merase leg ook Ahan nig Uivhen- J
ZL » thew & Kee, ack 4 can-f AEN caret.
vy faved. gina tony pre Prone
wld oie | a «fore ayy 3 he fr ra
ot wrkKen VR CEMAE “D> we , net

-fpareego a Ab€. ,

JEP nol nega Cieot auth. thaw’. Pret @

“ts gee nerf he ae aeTars DOA

Pat Vm et “ee len, the. Le. arth

Cie gl hee x. Vhawe og wick Lo ott nk Peat

yen OE we Love tha bu Vaw af -tsoly pu

Lore © YY Ase carol Ahr " ogeaee wel

. TEE riokere necareok
aug len Ge Cte were meettharmnsnt E ‘het

' bes oe geet. fearere ) O

We Fer igh at anal an oo ibe
Arrows: 3 fee ae wt “phovent wh am pawrbe
LO ce wr ling 4twK ory. smb ;
soe ee Beara 77 .
Callow ure yeas application that Vioay anrliines


--- Page 198 ---
14-0000

Ctitef, Contact Division :

Support Branch , —
Chief, Sen Francisco Office ec i.
Honolulu Reaident Agent

International Refugee Oreantaation, (120) Shangha

ye

The’ attached coments on the “IRO in Shanghai may bo of -
Lotérest-to ‘the DD/P- Tey vere ‘qddreseed by Cecil Evert, °°

159/3 Mowmirig Lu(s), Shanghai, china, in a letter, dated

26 Feb 56, to hie brother George Ewart, Kauai, T. He

M. GC. CHEEK

Attachnent

FLDaniels/ Jo

ates REM em ecnc



--- Page 199 ---
14-0000

“Rasove Comittoa,

> probably well-known

: Lc Chief, Cohtact vision

cuter, Ban. Pranoiseo office a _ . 9 Septoaber 1955

Chief, Woshingten Office

we

Alten Load 4 Hva Rrodovend! é oky : t.! COG a

1, Tne Wanhingtan Office bse roseived a routine

alten :
Jead an Eva Eralovensiy; ge 23, born in Caechsslowakla,<- 564,

Shousewife", aaderded for’ US tmalgrction by the yntersatisoal
Tho Washingten Office Pe atcotal one Of

%s sources and pried. that Miss Kralovensky. vas & stewardess .

on ono of the. three Cseoh airplanes which flew into Heat Germany

 (poseibly' teat, Berlin) about foar or five years ego, We wore

algo-inforned tHat’ elie, had boen an exployeo of Radio Free Durepa.

_.2, Tho Washington Office eantacted Aliea Branch (3ivess)
and asked if tharo waa any reasan to proceed further in
locating Mies Aralovenisky on the aoouspticon that she was
the intelligence comunity. Mr. “ivoss
@ washington Office that there would te

eheoied ond inforned

‘govort intorest in Hiss Eralovensky, and requested that her

address be obtained and the appropriate Liold office bo alorted

~fer.an alien contest. °

$. Tho Wasbingten sourse finally determined that

“Wad Krolovensky adved to California but at the and of two.

wooks finally settled In Reno, Hevado. She oan be ocatacted
at 621 ¥ 6th Stroot, Reso, ‘Nevada. es

¥. J. DuBose

Alfes Branch (Sivess) : 7

j yes
- rae
Boper rh
c utraet, he We
ston, D. &

wamwlh. mA a.

}
‘


--- Page 200 ---
14-0000

an Chiel, Contact Division | -

co ATIN 4 FE/P Branch

Mo _ Stier, San Pranofoo9 Office
a : : [~

pepsi, “SP£11362

The nam
to. inSPa11 363°

Seatly ¢
The Dimova fanily

Fy into Brazil,
lication’ on behalf of the

necesaury up;
0 Hong Kong,

Mrs. F.

im Farstasky ove
esky .

JIWaldronire



--- Page 201 ---
14-0000

chief, PI/ROVOIS neg, RR hagas 1932

_.Ghiof, Contact Division, 00

ei 1785
we SoS yed a

*" Mies Iydia Dimova Lo
7 . “2 ay the attached’ prelimtcary copy of 00-3-67938 18 fdrvarded |
' . . mo as baing of possible interest to your office. J

Spb + 2, The name of the youns voman of USSR nationality referred
oa oO : te in pereyreph 10 of the report is Hiss Lydia Linova, aye 30 years.

- Her mother, presently restoing ia Haroin, is Mra, :Clavdia Dinova. |
‘re THmova faaily is woll known to the source for sore than 30 years
and therefore the source feolp that any information pasced on to her
by the youns wounn eiployee of the bureru aight well be considered
ae reliable. so : oo '

‘ : “3. Prlor to the departure of the source froa Teipins, Misa.
: Dimova visited her and pleaded. with source to asoiet in. aneffort that .
they might oyeatually got out of Chink. She begged her to register
24 | Ser nano and the namo of her mothor with the United: latione, \Inter-
7S national Relief Organtzation,s through the Reverend Stunt of the
65 — Yatharan Churoh, World Federation of Churotes at Grenville Hosd in .
"Heng “Kong. Mies. Dimova to desirous of cotting up arrangemants through
.IRO 60 that she and her mother my yaln entry into Pracil, The source
completed the necessary application on behalf of tho Dinovas during
ber stay in Hong Kong. - : :

\ sg, the above is forwarded for your informticn ond whatever

eotion you say dean appropriate. . if you have any questions, please call
Mro, Carstens, oxtension 2268, bo 2 i"

E. M, ASHCRAPT 7

rt
“Enol.t 2 ma
ry oe |
Rearstens/wh : :
co Index



--- Page 202 ---
14-0000

10
Attn 3 lr. Anthony za jkowskh ’ Alden Brauch

Wikionicki/ba

stern pons HO OF

Office Menitandum « UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
_ : ase:
Citer’, Contact viviston a DaTB: 4 eober nosh

yaow chery Detroit cffice

- SUBJECT : Fatlure’ to locate Source Leads —

I have made ntmerous attempts to locate the YoLLowing ‘source seas you

furnished this osfice gorie. time ago-aad without, any success?

a deena toler GS sset

"Q2-charzotte Street ae
1

stroit, Michigan . .
. Dok
6-55 4

Nw. Stanislav Rely
1600 Wastenaw
. * Aun -Arbvor, Michigan.

File: Mr. Jan Kolar

‘Me, Stanislav Reitak ; a



--- Page 203 ---
14-0000

~ . - pee
igmoweromare ee ria’

oe shy
a F
- Of Memorandim + unit STATES GOVERNMENT

. me .) ’ . Chief, Contact Di'riston : . DATE: -& Cetober. 195%
Attu 2 hb. Anthony Cun jkowski, Allen, Brancti .

yom: Chief, Detroit Orfice

supyect: | Soiwee. Leads ~ Ho Potent4al

t ‘I nave coiitactod the foltewing source Jeais, which ere supplied by
. your office, and have found they do not have any in sellisence” pe tential:

ie. Thdeus: Kowilet S- ESwY:
USS He Tlellaa , : a
etroit, Miclifpaa —. . . yf
\

Mr. Vatnutis vestrevietig -

Grace kospital
kiGo John R.
Detroit, Michigun.

/ 4
ae . i
didatli L Kwek
on . Cis ak tees Wo. KAO
cee Lo NES K, MURPIY

, Wikoutekd/ba

: | Pile: Mr. Tadeusz Kowaksi . .
H ‘3 Mr. Vatnutis Vaitkevicilus . . '

SERA a near re BT ME oti sts Sor TM sect!

t

Penal


--- Page 204 ---
14-0000 |
1 ad a le
! et

“GOS NIS 35°36 ROUTINE aerated .

papIDEsTIAL ‘CK NR AD4 To. SAN FaAxcisco, FRott KASHINGTON

cwk FoR osm ROK: 2 ASHCRAFT ay Nera BAANCAL roy verre wae7397
cepaka. RPT 9014 (00-3 16339

@ RPT 13688" yur RCPORT SL
DOES: SOURCE NEAN iat

AGRAPH 3 EPT 3 LAST SENTENCES
THE CHECKING FOR Te 7

uaY IN witicn

CASE 1568

“ner 162502 PAR

tit SOUTH AFRICAN DIPLO: ATIC ‘SERVICE DCES
a

SYNDICATE OR ONLY THAT THE: SYNDICATE 15 TACTFUL IN THE

2 VE SUSPECT THE LATTER 1S THE CASE, pUT OUR CONSUNERS,“s

. ah

IT CHECKS
ARE CERTAIN TO VONDER. THIS. 15 A goon REPORT Axo § SHOULD. BE OF
VALUE HERES a eae ; .

_ A

3LEn FRANK cinastENsEN > aed

enn

. Tet
i



--- Page 205 ---
74-0000

| erarecniens roses recy $8

Moe. .

Office Memorandum * UNITED ‘STATES GOVERNMENT

Chier, Contact, pivision DATE: “7 Jan 54
acting Chifef, Detroit, Office .
John T. Hazea, Cleveland Office _ “e ~ :

¢ Bk

Visit to Mr. Tadeusz Stefan jucner, 2hjl Treuont St., Cleveland, Ohio

“ he ow 6 Sun Su, a visit wos made to Mr. ‘Tadeusz Stefan
-Kucner, a Polish displaced person whotaPrived in the US on
ll Mul 51. His alten registration nunbver is 8 059 181.

|. 2. Mr. Kuener was born in Lwow 6 Feb 1905. He attended’
"the Polytechnical Aendewy of Lwow fron 1925 to 1932 when he ree .
‘T ceived bis dearee in architectural enginecring. :

: 3. Fram 1933 to 1939 Mr. Kucner worked for the city ad-
pinistration of chan as 4 building construction inspector for
the Poznan. building construction board of control. This was
“gipiler to a city planning commission in the US.

. &, "In 1940, after the German ‘occupation, subject was sent
‘by the Germans to Warsew. He worked in Warsaw as a-representative
t-—" of the inspector of building construction board of control until
We. ;
_ 5. When the Germans evacuated the city Mr. Kucner was trans-.
L-"ported. by freight car to Leipzig where he remained until the end of
the war. . : :

6. Subject resided in several DP camps in Germany from 19kh5
- until nis departure for the US in 1951. He was employed. by IRO as :
a technical exaviners . ° . mo.
th Poznari and Warsaw, Mr. Kucner was

"Ts During his-years in bot!
! poncerned only with residential buiidings and was unablé to supply
ese cities.

‘“qnformstion of industriel installations in th

which are not worthy of

- "8. Some comments made by subject, \
any interest they may have.

COA dissemination, are being forwarded for
em 9. : Since Mr. Yucner's arrival in the "5 he has been employed as
@ isborer in a foundry. : .
WO. Mr. kucner will not be visited again, therefore no name :

check dsta is being submitted. : ae

LT
; jot

JTR/os

Z



--- Page 206 ---
14-0000

F-55564
Chtof, Kew York Office a ; “30 Sept Bons
7 vl 2 7 Chior, San rrancisco Orfice D-BRS IDLY. - . ,

Some ittee for Ble re Scholars © Scares Lead.

. ae a
_ a 2 sTIeFe
yo In tho ovent that yeu are x0 ol ready in towcn with Otto Loft
"| @f ‘tho Amorloan Comrittes for imipre Scholars, *ritere, and Artiate,-
G2 Root 45th Street, Now York -ity, vo belfovo that yor may find hin

‘and/or hig argent, sation B useral oxtect, It hoe coza vo our attention
- that 4off frou Lino to tine reosmmecds iuesian lezcuage dnotructors.te ~
: - the Ary Len;uaj6 ‘ichool ot tho Fretidio of soutorey, california, 18
i eceurred to us that ore would bo Lz @ position te provide you vith
Buporous source less on well efumte: aliens in the Us These mon
A ould inelude on opera, ecleaticts, and tencherae | Bot only should

: \ he bo ablo to give you the names 3? 2?s in your area, tut also these
- . 4 Who have moved’ tn. sreas vavored sy cur other slalc Sfflovase He now
a Rothing further in reget co the camnittes for Tahore Scholara (ite
i beckiny, orientation, roliedilitys, - :

_®e Inoidentully, wo have a vartal acrovnent with the Comzandant
of tho Any Langunze: School that we vill NOt Uae our Becosa to tho riles
of h&e current lenpuage instructors ag a Hoans of "ralgine" his ravulty,

. -fe@e offorias Cla amploymans to thax therefore, thls maorancum is
{ not meant aa c sourso lead Sor povextial ém.loyuos! 4lso, »o fool that
; it would bo proforatlo that you vo nex lncicate to orf that ‘you know
thet he recommonds pereonnol to the *rosidio of kon torsye

BW .6 CERLK

Ite/VSouritea

oot 00/c” ,

| kee



--- Page 207 ---
14-0000 tt

THE INTER NAEION AL RES

the start of the Cold War + thie fntern:
¢ has organized val

Of persons fleeing 5
jo the, free city of W
ce then 3,000 per day during
ittee successfully x

‘more than $
ine, drone

‘stood between You and

| Davin rustean, Dreaurer’ oe : .
| BOARD OF DIRECTORS : oe
“ALN. Hemwa, Jn, . .

Hasse. Nok.

‘from Communism,

Enclured please find check for :
becription for the cautinuanes

Name

amr
‘Adder
| cay

on wf CAeehe shohd tee nase
7. Hewue Committee

(AM Canuriburions ductible feom tarvable income)

} + Bo 08,

Beaute T pet Shame ote nt, Bt be qyincae cen «nth ean... uk heat oregon TS


--- Page 208 ---
14-0000

workers bit within boars it ha

: and support of free mien every

‘The Tarniug Point
3 one ifthe most
20h ceitury took

The inisuerection began ii.
June 16th. Tt was begat: initial

every level of the population, By the 17th
of June the uprising bh spread throughout
the Bast Zone 8

apontancaus revolt.

Av 11:00: o'clock the m

{6th ihe workers in block f, Stalin’ Allee,

decided to ofgaaire. a dentensteal
teal the raising of the work norm by the
regime. By 2:00 o'clock that same ufter>
nous. the mob of people. which hud grows

from 200 te over 20.000 became revolu

tionaries, Surging in front of the East Zone
Government buildings in East Berlin, they
demanded not only he lifting of the norms
but free secret electisins, the unifiegtion of

‘Germany and the abdication of the East

German government,

The stories contained here are the stories
af afew of those brave men and women
from East Germany who played feading
roles ia the revolt and had te flee to the
Weet. ‘They are representative, of 1,000
leaders, many of whem have rubsequently
heen sentenced to death by Communiot
Some were intellectuals and profes
Most af them were vorkme AN

we xl
here.

eon
sional
are men who deserve the undy

yearn. they ©
aise of slavery -

wriorganized, |

tude:

US eee
“Rare Fists Againat Armed Maght. Histo
af the Perennial, Tneatinguishable Urge of the
: Human Heart jor Freedom. .

stalin Allee Block 40...

AW FU ANG ‘Toetiney wea a building con
straction laborer working on -fiock 40, Stalin

* tllew

“When the work narme were jnereased the
men Were furious. We began daily to gather in
émall groupe before and after work. The fear
that had made us so. cautiour gradually began
to dissolve, ‘There was, after all, little more
to lose.

“Dy the morning of June 16 we were reso
Inte. As always. We entered the, building on
which we were working and took our ta-
tions, But this day we sét down and refused to
work. ere War DO organization, 20 lender.
butearh man knew what had to be done. The
aman dashed in gaping with disbelief. His
eves turned to the spo! ii
crease Ore
walked in wi

Wark Norm= rensed

age of these men in-pired the rest of us to

action.

“4 concrete worker leaped onto a heap of

stones. ‘Tleave it to you a8 individuals! Those



--- Page 209 ---
14-0000

sn of hee |
The deft!"

weeping wil : _
march in, the
Wh. BO reso.

y

HWdling- we %
fthe. crowd.
the*most

peautiful.d

ar
Youth Mi
girl of twenty with

‘the eral be!
o a fellow: instretetor 6m eo up to
jd me to take careful note of the
. monatention and
ning. } woe
ent hurry to Tease
he square and told fins if be wae av afrotd
for his life he had better jump eno trom ino
hurry and get out.

wA few minutes later i foreed my Way ‘|

fand jumped t

anizesd ane 4 8 d

Ebj. They houted and tae

hadt realized how hated the FDI

was, Infuriated hy the refusal of the ¢
nist leaders to epprar anidby the open coward:
ive of. my male FDJ companion, | tore off my.
EDJ jacket and threw it to the ground. The

echeers. | ‘ a

ered my etrvngth vad shouted a
the crowd that members of the
1 and would

n
‘Do not allow them to

People beeen

i

nists were spotted.
my strength ae Bene A
for me.”

few mi

pireme .

here wereonly twerily invmy group ae we :
i he Neandenburs ‘area. At that

Te that decarding 2 8 heoad-
ithe, wackers In East
Whough we knew that
nist Zone. were, connld-
uaa punishable by to

Uwe marched 08 wiih a fecling ©
werstridl

€ inules OF
phout five hundred.

AR we approached. factory protected by
ced employers shouts”

hit iran gaten. we notl
fro the situ

Cows
eo rushed out and embra dun. -

At this tine, we \ thought we were the
ors tv the elly. As we neared
we were ol azed and ~
ja of people © Averg:
‘¢ had not f Hy real-
onstantly intinsdute
ire controls. could rise up 98
nr without @ strong central leade ebsipy.
oo weap nothing but determinal
We were overwhelmed it what we saw.”

center
ed to find thew

The Red Flag At. Brandenburg Gate
Down

(Horst Baie is a 20-year-old truck driver

of Kast Bertin

“=p looked down into the crowd and saw
three Soviet officers Tooking helpless
L climbed to the top of the to
yp aly pole. f flung the Mug to the
t contempt and watched the
y s plecen. They applauded an
Mrehtted in a way Thad newer “peard before



--- Page 210 ---
14-0000

instailing: th
Kowsan had brought three t
Hing up the (a
“ty finish my,

West

Rertia. was in ite
Twas sale.”

~As the intergonal train arrived’ iy the sts,
tien, the’ frightenéd- passengers: locked: the
Qdoars and windows, fearing an attack by
and police. As soon as th
the windows and

doors sere openc
embeseing cach other, shouting, ¢

cetebration, assur
Esxt and West was an aceomplished fact.
spread the word along
tin, At me we stilt
ns were taking place onty

in Magdeburg ¢
few hours later when we learned front RIAS

(Weice of America) and NWDK (We:
station) thal uprisings we!
Fast Germany.

mYhe neat train to-arrive contained 9 pris
ener car. After a few tease moments we mar
aged to gain control of the train and get the
cells open. One of the prisoners was a 7

ois Magdeburg.)

“under the weight of the

We were jubilant a

. aguin'be free.”

wht farmer who was bmprisoned a year before
begause he had not Been able to meet his

He wad speechless with (right a dis.
When he war finally convinced that he
_naea free naa, he broke dowaand wept, over

come vith hilm away.”-

the heroic-liberation of 80 political prisoners

“A mob 3.000 strong niortied hi

yard of the prison in Magdeburg. The prison-

ers pressed their worn, pale faces against the
chara, A in the crowd started to sefeam
as che recognized her Husband who hud been
arrested only two days before.

“The wooden dorsal the pri
rging crowd, The
The metal dove to the cell block
ne Mengelsdorf called for the
J together opened the cell
ie jecenes followed. One

im! Freedem!’,. then
the floor crying. A young man sen-
rx for crimes against the stale

Alndeseribs

stepped out of h

see hom he hud been engaged. Neither knew
Ihe other was there until the doors opened.
They embraced, wordles.

wiet tanks rumbled into the prison yard
befare all the prinonere could be releaned.
elador€ himself barely cxeay
route of escape lay wining
the Landwehreanal which separates Eat and

in at certain spots. He waited until
it. narrewly escaping
th fram Soviet bullets which peppered the
td him. He is today in one of the
destitute but resolved
when all of East Ger-,
countries will

dark and

camps in W
that one day will com
many as well a» the satell

(the girl’


--- Page 211 ---
he
; : {
( t
1 :
‘ 1 2
i ‘
! .
: - ‘ _
, ' A cy
if i. .
t
aI
3 “
J
7 ; : ee :
: i ¥
:
|
|
rr i
:
H BUSINESS REPLY ENVELOPE | &
| H First Class Permit No. 44779, See. 34.9, PL- a R, New York, N.Y. SEN
a : Ss)
| j : ETS
i INTERNATIONAL RESCUE COMMITTEE SOA
‘ 62 WEST (sth STREET : sons
i NEW YORK 36, N.Y.
: Seite 600 . :
yo \ ~ - beeen Stat >
7 |
5 :
: \ “| :
: ‘} 1
HW \
a .
e Hy i ’
& so :
z : o
[ a
i
4
g ‘
i '
i an!
i
Dal
. 1 ||
H f .
i i th
: : }
i



--- Page 212 ---
14-0000

combo uanenncnn wee emtemne, Seem atany

sayeth ek Be Hea ato

1 aim glad to add my contribntion (0 help those suffering
. ay

from Communist oppression.

Enclosed please, find check for $--

as my subscription for this vital work.

- Name ae

Address eee

City Fra Zone___—- State.
. (Contributions are deductibre from taxable income) Ge 028

raselsee en yboet *



--- Page 213 ---
0000

cd

NATIONAL

Neath

62 WEST 45th STREET. NEW YORK 46, N. yee MUrtay 1 Cable Adktees: INTER ESE

LEAIGN
CPL SMON ALS

Aviat. Riciann E, BYaD IKON CURTAIN KREG

. : © Mumorary Chea mia - .

‘ ee Lio CHPANE , . . , .
oye - ; ‘September 22, 1953

Chairman

RESLTT LEME xe CAMP AGN aus puny CK

Daviv Ft WERMELD
Tocataret 7

ponditiert. as

aunt BRIBSNDEN FT T have just returned from Berlin. tT an reporting to you as -
one of many ‘observers who are agreed that the weapontess men and women

of Eastern Germany stand as the first line of defense petwoen Us and
£ Soviet Power. The entire world is now 4

Boas ot Directors ‘Pear’
ALA. WRLE, JR. a

a > Cua ni wT : the tyranny ° ~

“ TL Wutast FratuseN ‘been happening in East Berlin and Esst Gernany since Jwie 17, 1953.
SAMULL GOLDWYN . . a. . . . . . .
A sO, . But do you know why this most resarkablo revolution occurred -

how, these people 3

Justus D s
Da Mane ROUSLSTLT ariver dom the strest, the pand leader - hava been able to rebel
LAvID SHER against overwhelming odds? .1t is not only out of shear dosperation
Grows, P. SKOUIAS ‘pecauso of the insufferable conditicns-under-which thoy have een
HSL RAL CARL SPAATL living. People in the other satellites are suffering, ‘Those are
paren “people who are deseratoly weary of tyrants of all political shades
Travan TAYLOR and colors.. Through the window of Wast Berlin ws gavo thea hopo for
fe cannot let then

potter world and they have become our allies.
do we have lowered the first defense in the battle
minds » hearts and podies of mon.

Min, Wika VARGA , a
AWTHUN K-WATSON down, When Wo
L HoLtincswor nt Woop
‘Auatiwac ELLIS M. LACHARIAS against tyranny over the
CHARLIS S. ZIMMERMAN” . co too

—s _ The enclosed personal accounts of the June ATth rebellions
of man's Anvincible desire for freedom, The Inter-

malttes ‘4s doing everything possible to aid these

Tpae My teaten =.
bec tea pene einer LT MMe

ApraM G. BECKER”
Execurive Director national Rescue Col

3 of the resistsnce Jeadors and pro- 5 ,
ar help to continue this ae
‘

4

your sontribution 30 that we may
ye men and women in whom

The aid we are extonding to then is
‘A message which says that we

- uo believe in the dignity and goodness of people enough to help them sur-- :
= . yive their worst times so that thoy can fight for potter times. :

Copaributinns detuatible (2001 taubte Wow

ne Ads nee Cedarmatter 0 Weed? huge

Pre granne acd rings cal tateroe ey fled wath th adeg rhe Deparemat et Sele



--- Page 214 ---
14-0000

| | Ee a
meg Cefon - 7 i

ERS ES be TL hn nga



--- Page 215 ---
ia)

. ROOM 600

61 WEST 4Sch STREET * NEW YORK 36, N.Y.

4

14-0000



--- Page 216 ---
froo000

GENERAL HOSPITAL

bb. Dr., R'helan, Rathaomtr. 4 ? ; (.

ee | ee on a we FT ey.

: : . . " . ah . pe «

LR.0.

1949

yt. _, Soptenber

AREA 7. MUNICH “eo ~

SUB-AREA ROSENHEIM . Nr

Rosonheim, Morarer Strahe 48 . : ; _
Teleton 451

TO WHOM IT MAY cOsl Es

S-Sebfo.

- Tats is: to: cadtity that _ Des ce 2 u

_ deen employed with: zo General Bossi tal “somal Tas. the “sater
Doctor of TSS cont:ol since ist of Oet ber: 1948 till to date to our:
Break Satis’ Saction. ; ; a i .

Dr. Ko rn Llev “Mykola bas “pad a long practical
exper fen: 2, is very capable, and precise in. his work,

fle hes. a most pleasant manner at ‘all tines will snes and
well liked by patients and personnel.

: Since Drs Korn ilev wants to “Ani geate saortly | we
“wish kim all the best for his future work and life . :



--- Page 217 ---
14-0000

Your zozorendun to Chief, FED dated 6 July 1953, Case 12643...

ARAN
Chief, Contact Division 17 July 1953

Deputy Chief, Foreign Docusents Division a 5 ol te

Case 12243 BS f S Ya 5

- 1. We appreciate the information you ‘sent us on this ‘case. :
It was requested cancelled vy telephone sowe tine ago, but we
should have followed it with 3 memorandum. ‘ :

2. For your inforzation 1f you have sicilar inquiry tn
the future, ve have found that the fincst instruction in lip
reading is available at the Audiology and Speech Correction Center
of Army operated under Walter Reed Hoopital at: Forest Glen, dd.

BENJAMIN B, CAIN



--- Page 218 ---
14-0000

bs
_ : SECURITY 4.
Chief, Foreign’ Docuzents Division,
Chief, Contest Division, 00
Case 12243

00/¢ 2 Juno 1953 senorancus, Case 12843, in reply
19 ‘prob 1953. request. .

kre you interested in having ue obtain additional |
Yard of Loaring or i :

Gotails on the New! fork’ Les cua for the Han
cuffiolent for

E, M, ASHCRAFT

AWebater/wh
ce Index’

;
5
i
;
§
i
y
i
:
¥
5
z
E
:
FS



--- Page 219 ---
14-0000

4 > Uhtet, Cantact Hivistai, 47 me. : —_ wo

Cabely F

‘Cane 123

1 re Cadntg 29 Sere 1903- canveradtion wits re Delay

rMery af Le cent poe
aternine (a) whether it ark)
te Ubpers.. afaelentio; Cy
tench Lip ered

Oe Le.
the fiard of
a

winateiy toa Long
rid Caste. '

1
' me :
: af ve cou Leave rere
iferis th |

: he it
' lea buisver x: exter Bis:
i
Hh ‘ :
a
boos

. Vebster: wh

1

Reh aay ca altel


--- Page 220 ---
1400000) | |

} Cole
SECRET TO QASHINGTON FROM NEY YORY . de

TO ASHCRAFT FOR 55 -CESSTER) FROM LEA-SECURITY INFORMATICN=CITE NY~7¢69°

CASE 12243 RPT 12843 gor oe oe

SOURCE AT NY LEAGUE FoR THE “WARD OF HEARING: STATES THAT IT 15 =
POSSIBLE TO (A) TEACH’ A HEARING PERSON TO LIP-READ FROFICIENTLY ne
cu}, AND (@) IT 13 ALSO POSSIBLE To TEACH A PERSON LIP“READING WHO IS IN
oo ‘THE PROCESS OF LOSING HIS NEARINS, WITHOUT GOING. INTO THE PROBLEM
MORE DEEFLY SOURCE COULD NOT SPECIFY THE LENGTH OF TIE IT WOULD TAKE
_TO DEVELOP FROFICIENCY. LEARNINS SIMPLE PHRASES SUCH AS A NURSE WOULD
| REQUIRE CAN 8£ DONE IN A SNORT. TIME, HCUEVER, SOURCE SAID THAT THE
LEAGUE HAD TAUGHT LIP READING TO HEARING PEOPLE IN SPECIAL CASES”
||| WHICH WERE GF A *CONFIDENTIAL® NATURE. AS THE LEAGUE OPERATES UNDER
“| THE STATE BoarD OF EDUCATICN IT WAS NCT PCSSISLE TO ARRIVE AT THE
_ COST CF SUCH A COURSE IN AN INFORMAL TELEFHONE INQUIRY. IF WE couLD
HAVE MORE DETAILS WE COULD CeME UP WITH MUCH MORE Derinite INFORMATION.
oo J. A

: FILES HRS LEWIS, WY LEAGUE For HARD oF HEARING

CCCCt THIRD WORD OF HEADING SHCULD READ *WASHINSTON®



--- Page 221 ---
14-0000

n
'
at
|
i

1
‘
i
1
i
i
:
t
i
;
|
1.
in

ee

Bs pe ssht

MESSAGES +
CASES REFERRED HEREIN

rt oF THE ABOVE THAT YO!
ITH YOUR OP?

WE
TO THESE

“LEAST TWO C/S°S ARE WORMINS oN THE THO
uM OTKE Lich

ALSO LIKE TO sUSGEAT to yes !
TO SPEND A COUPLE oy pays 1X THIS CFF ICE TO COORDINATE V
1ESE MINOR PROBLEMS

posite NUMBER HERE yA FEW OF T!
“suggest THAT You SH way WE HAVE HES REACTIONS

RECOMMENDAT 1ONST a

FILES NEW YORK LEAGUE res HEARING o/
on - Sb farvis
go

J ARRANGE

AND TO SFI
ow THES TC STAN

e

SECRET To WASHES TOW FROM:NES YORK

: a
TO ASHCRAFT FoR $5 arose FROM LEA - SECURITY” INFORMATION: * . ~
CITE NY-6LAT Sa! os y
. . . . at
> QASE 12,885 RFT 12,843 * YOuS 46308 RET N6SEES _ ; 4

“gouty aPmnECLATE | Im THE TUTEFE TF YoU WOULD REFER TO ONLY ONE CASE INU

LEACH DISPATCH THIS WILE ASSEST US IMMENSELY -IN LOGGING AND rout rHs oF

UE ARE SURE THAT YOU APPRECIATE THAT 17 8: POSSIBLE THAT AT

ua sHoULt


--- Page 222 ---
a Tare THAT You GAVE "ROBINSON OF OPC ADEQUATE INFORMATION AGQUT ERNnes

SECHET CK NR 74S TO NES YORK. Fm WASHINGTON’ -

TO LEA FROM ASHCRAFT SY SS (ESTER) = SECUXITY INFORMATION = CITE
W-6 388 a

NEW CATE 1343 APT Be3433 EDD HAS REQUESTED, THAT we ASK THE
NEw YORK EAGUE For “THe ‘WARD OF HEARING, 439 RPT 459 LEXINGTON AVEN Ey

: NEW ‘Yor, CA) WHETHER IT WOULD BE FuSsSIBLE To: TEACH A HEARING PEARSON

To LIP-READ PROFICIENTLY; CB) SHETHER LT eoULD BE POSSIBLE TO TEACH

LIP-READING TO A PERTON YHO IS IN THE PROCESS OF LOSING HIS HEARING;

“) IF “Oy APPROX IMATELY Hos Ly 2NG iT wOULa TAKE AND HOW MUCH WOULD IT

CO"T. FDD DOE: IN’T WANT YOU TO MAKE A BIG ISSUE OF: THIS AND- neudeves
THAT INFORMAL TELEPHONE REQUEST MIGHT BE ALL THAT-TS RE UI De “
BACKS. GROUND! QUERIES HERE AT GACLAUDET COLLERE Cdl THE. DEAF) Ri RESULTED
JIN OPINION THERE THAT A HEARING PERSON OULD BE ALNOST Inposs 1aue
SUBJECT FOR SUCH TRAINING, FYI, THIS CASE is TIED IN WITH case 12455
HPT. 1c4536

NEW UBJECTS cLosen CASE 3314 RPT Sota, NY=9354 RPT NY-*$854

STIWstdta. WE ARE TRYING TO TRACK DOWN ROBINSON (CAN YOU TELL us
WHICH ONE HE WAT) TO SEE WHAT WAS DONE ABOUT TINSMITH. CAN YOU TELL
US WHAT YOU TCLD ROBINTON ABOUT TINSMITH? PLEASE ADVISE... i : ™
FILE: ERNE?T TINSMITH, NY LEAGUE. FOR THE Haro OF HEARING :

20/15557 MAR AFS



--- Page 223 ---
yeoooug r ves

| ee
t ‘
; 6 ~éRCH 1959 Ce,
Bo Wow ok . am
boot ! ot toe t
i Ht z
“e |
i f . . a aa .
Pewa prutacncnry av aired 1 / le G

|W gare 12,667. RRUR FY-S913s, . -
Peeve op THR ADP IPTOML TWO C°TATHPD TW WS). “WE ABP CLOSTSA

are se eenceserIL, |

- veut oe ;
San Index (Tren Curtaia Refeges Coxne) . - _ a : or
: { ‘ . : . ° 3
A
i
i
: aT
i:
Q



--- Page 224 ---
“ECRET TO UASHINGTON FROM NEW YORE.

TO ASMCRAFT FOR ALLEN FROM LEA ~~ SECURITY INFORMATION o>

- CITE xY 9913.

Cast 12667 :
“FURTNER-TO NY 368 .
NOT arr wor or AAD AT

Ano’ 9824 RPT WY 5012 AND HY 3620, CPRESUMADLY
ST TO'RUAUESTOR ), WE RAVE BEEN TOLD
“arte HINBUMR APT DR, RETHHOLD
“nitpum “Wap: ante. CHAIBRAN og. THE RESETTLEMENT CAHPAICH yon EXILED
PROFESSIONALS» mut SAS THIS POST NAS BEIN SDORHANT® SINCE WITBUNR'S
-ITHDRAUAL FROM TRC RPT IRC FOR HEALTH REASONS, BECAUSE CF SMALLIR
Ux OF DPYS RPT DP'S (AND PEDMAPS ALSO BECAUSE OF SMORTACE %

INFLU:
FUNDS) THERE KAS | BEEN A “DRASTIC DROP 18 THE RESETTLEMENT CASE LAD.

“A THIKD DEPARTMENT oF Ire “cn adDITICN TO acne 7 AGE Re RESEFTLES
“WENT CAMPAIGN) USED YO BE WHAT LS ROY AHERICAN committee FOR EngGRe
SCHOLAR 3, WRITERS, AND ARTISTS, Inc, THIS COMMITTIE, wnzen MASA.
NESTORY SEPARATE FROM JAC, WAD BEEN MERGED WITH IRC BECAUSE THE :
COMSINED | OPERATION was MORE LIL RPT LIKELY 10 RECEIVE yor FOUNDATION

: GRANTS THAR THE THO COMHITTEES ‘SEPARATELY A FIVE MUNDRED THOUSAND

DOLLAR GRANT SY THE FORD “FOUNDAT 16H YAS. HOT FOLLOVED UP BY ADDITIONAL
FUNDS, As HAD BEEN EXPECTED, AND THE AMERICAN COMMITTEE FOR EMICRE
ICKOLARS BTCe YAS SUBSEQUENTLY BE-ESTABLISHRD AS AS on SEDAOATE CACANIZATION, —

WITH ELSE ST AUD IMG ER RPT ELSE STAUDINGER as uxicuttvE pinscton AXD

v2.32 RPT 1263296

NELSON P, MEAD “RPT “nist ra ARAD AS CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD, THE LAST-
KAMED OUTFIT CONTINUES TO OCCUPY FACILITIES ADJOINING IRC’S AND TO
MAINTAIN CLOSE AND FRIENDLY RELATIONS WITH IRCe vrie WE HAVE A :
CONTACT AT THE SCHOLARS COMMITTEE SEPARATE FROM IRC (SEE ALSO. CASE :

cR°as5



--- Page 225 ---
14-0000

cLosED, CASE STAa R

“VE Dow

WHAT | WE pID NOT TELL ROBINSON, pecause “i

EGRET To: “wASHLENGTON Fhow NEW YORK

Te asueur’ FOR “gs (EDSTER) FRC Leaestcunity puronation-c1tE nY$6158

PT 6745 (NOT asia. RET usta ba REUR 6388 RPT V6 35880
i : a 7 “ys q

*T ICH WHICH RCOINSON RPT ROBINSON: FROM OFC WE SAG BUT WEe

TELL HIN THAT EX NEST TINSHITH RFT ERNEST TINSHITH LIVES AT 25¢71 TH

STREET APT 25-71 “S9TH STREET, airoany xe ISLAND, USES THE ALIAS

ERNEST TOPOLCZY RFT ERNEST TOPOLCZV7 CLAINS HIS ANCESTORS ARE nas
~OF DEAF -HUTES..AND WAS DIRECTOR

QiD

COMES FRO: NORTHERN HUNGARY) -IS~A- TEACHER:

OF A DEAF MUTE SCHOOL IM AUSTRIA, HAS DEEN UNABLE TO FOLLGY cut H13

PROFESSION HERES

E ONLY LEARNED oF * vESTERDAY,
~ 13 THAT TINSMITH WAS RECENTLY MeCe ATA DINNER SIVEN BY GEN RERAL ME

RPT 2AKO'S MHOK RFT NHBK, AN EXTER NE RIGHTSUING HUNGARIAN VETERANS?

ORGANIZATION, AND THAT TINSHITH 1s a EXTREME RICHTONINGERs ©

WE ASSUME ‘You WERE REFERRING TC CASE Bras ‘RFT 8744 OM TINS4 ‘ITH TO WHICH

“CUR NY*9854 RET 9854 15 TIED, VE DON'T “sce now YOu GCcT “CASE 8814 RPT

3818 MIXED INTO THIS CASEo
Rese ; oo. .



--- Page 226 ---
14-0000

Cidof, stuft ¢, & . : "26 Kareh 1993
: etn vane "hen vine low = °

| Shdat, Contact PA swisiton, CO “
. ao eg

Concorn avout Fhysical Securhty of Cisala vugailioy, “ne Ropresontative
in Borlin . os

. 1, -A source of this division, who > hes beon associated witr Gtoola Wassiliow -
4n tho IC, hao tranonitted a letter, ted 23°¥e> $3, written by.her. Sho has
been Dirge tor of thy Varlin office of ihe Ge for ayproxdine ly threo yorrae A

copy, of tho Jottor is attached.
2. Tho gourco knows Vassiliew as a celn porsan not cdyen to hysterica.

30 This information ds. voing transmitted also to TiSO. .

he “Any dnquiry concerning Ube nenoranehn ghould bo cirected to Mr, As Fe

Caajkovetcy extension arte Je

Ge Me ASTORAPT
Attacknont -
AfCzajkowsld /eJe
cer Ol

Index-2
V, therne-1

APPROVED FOR TRANSMITTAL ©

Aah Bt hte
Asste Dir. for Operaticns



--- Page 227 ---
14-0000
TORR

© ape ao roma na 04 if ‘6S 7 y

Off ce Memor andum “6 UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT .

To 2. Chief, Contact Division’ . SO DATE: 27 February 1953 .
FOR : Alien Branch (czascovekt) ig 3774 4 . a a J
FROM 1. Chief, New York Office ”.. De fo Bete TAT

: >. ap ger!
susjict: Concern abéut Phypféal Becurtty-ot-——7/7- 52° f
: Gisele Wagolliew, Me Tepresentative ‘in Berlin
Our TK NY-9700, dated 30 Nov 51 (to Alfen Branch)
wth
Bs) Aa nartin recomended subject individual (whose nane he
Jasiijew'y for-contact by this office, Martin described this Germen
-pational, wife of @ Russian DP then’ end now in the US, aa"exceptionally
“capable, intelligent, with rare political understanding". She hes been
. director of the Berlin office of the International Rescue Committee for some
an - ‘three’ yeara (perhaps longer). As you know, the IRC has been prominent for
. aid given to Weot Berlio and is currently in the midst of 6 campaign for aid
to refugeés arriving there in increasing numbers from the East. .

In reference
spelled "Was

jrector of the IRC, has passed on to us a letter

: -Februery 1953,. in which “she reports alleged
‘temptson the part -of “the East” to kidnap her. in view of her activities

and her connection with Rainer. Hildebrandt 's Kempfgruppe gegen Unmenach-

lichkeit, there may be some basis for her fears. Mr. Becker, who knows her.

. _ 68.8 calm person not given to hysterics, is deeply concerned about her safety

on and has atated that he sould have replaced her with a U.S. citizen if it were

: ‘pot so difficult to fim a qualified successor. He has requested that we ,
communicate with any U.3. agency or department in a position to provide
physical security for persone representing U.S. interests in Berlin.

2 Mre Becker, present executive
- 7 Wassiliew, dated.

to our superiors, but ve

i 3. We have promised Mr. Becker to pass on hia request
abroad or of CIA responsi-

told him that we were not aware of CIA facilities
pility for coordinating action ebroed with other appropriate US Government
agencies. . We therefore suggested that Mr. Becker himself communicate with
such agencies to the test of his ability and did not commit CIA to any action

pol _-, upon his request.

4, Tf, in your judgment, the covert stoffs might be interested in this problem or
te) can be

a. justifiable reprezentation to other agencies (e.g. Defense or Sta’
. made, we feel that such action would serve U.S. security interests ond, inci-
H we _ dentally, benefit TRC in a measurable way. We are attaching Mrs. Wasiliew's
: letter for whatever use you care to make of it. ‘ : :

or Mra. Wassiliew, and these indivi~-
to the best of our knowledge.

5. This office has had no contact with Mr.
duals are not aware of any possible CIA interest,

hing you can do, whether bir. Becker should

6. Please advise whether there 1s anyt!
(if he has not done so in. the meantime), and

approach arother Government ageucy

_what-reaction, if any, we may pass on. to Becker. L.
Lo . : so : yy tye
. : : . Charles A. Lea a
WLP oo oo .

WLFreund:mfd
ATT: 7



--- Page 228 ---
14-0000

Dear Abet

‘3 om sorry that I must vother yo

vu . o \ : .
\¥ wv : et \ . _
‘yo XO : \ . - Date: Feb 23, 1953
Newo tor ~BE (cct Munich, Frankfurt)

Fromt . Giocls (Wassiliew) . .
(3. Bmserstr., Berlio Wilmersdorf

Germany}

u with my personal preblers, put since I don't -
know vhat to do under the present cixcunstances I an bessing you for understanding.
As you know I always. hed. trouble. with"the other side”. If somebody vorks in this
field be mot ve endangered after 6 certain time. I believe. J told you about the
calis in Russion ant about the spies who are constaatly. around me since about 1951.
J am used always to be on the alert and to look around me cerefully, this ie the
only thing I can do, .In addition to that I bought a dog in the summer of last yesre

Bince about four months the attexpte of the Eust to gat have increased. IT had
several rencontrey with then and nave informed the police, But singe wo have 50
many people here in Berlia who have good reasons to feel endangered they cannot
watch everybody constantly and the persor in question is more or less left to

his ovn messureo.

Last Wednesday night I ran into a gituation which would have meaut the end for ne

“$f a friend of mine had not happened to be vith ms. This way they did not dare to
D lvays walking alone; and cars and helpers

disappeared (not around). I heve reported ny situation again to the police, they

promised to do vhat thay can,
that mikes qt ao little nore darficult for then

my GOu and buy a sharper One. When I bought
I did it merely 65 .

not because I had proofs of the danger I woo Living under.
For this purpose he is good but not for the purpese
“They have already calculated ry dog into the plan.
absolutely need another much sharper One.

I sell my dog
expensive, Then I have decided that I cannot go to
anymore. I can move from one of my frienis to the other vor a certein tins but.

not constantly. A friend of the Comittee will pick as up every morning and bring ™
home at night in his car. ‘In ‘the meontine I°
vho bag an office cor and arrange with her that her a@river pick re up. But this
will take somo ting; until I have reached her and discussed the matter with her.

Please don't believe that I a3 hysterical, on the contrary. But now it is so that
I not only feel endangered but I have knowledge of their intentions end I an

sure I would not get out again, once they have bad hold of me.
‘Cordially yours,

/s/ Gisela

11 talk to Mrs. Wolf? of .rbeitervoblfahrt,


--- Page 229 ---
14-0000

!

“— e a

i, retonrTy SEQRE te pASdIESTOR va m3 eag
TO ASRCRATY FoR ALIEN rH LEA co TCURTY | tavoaRAT Ie
‘OITE « > HV SENG

‘Wrai ;

- | PRourCT WAS SFLINDID,

“TwtaR Est TO Us, BUT THIS FACT HAY BE. EXPLAINED BY WA) oun oan artirupe

~
-23
_™“

Vs vxo ‘BAD Jorn me am ire Stay ) apa
SHE. TAKE t™ auTuret 499) RPT 1951 To ‘RPOVIDE.-
“PROVIDE an ‘ALTERHATE, c aur UIT THE Inc im NIs oon ABSENCE ,

avd AY RPT an DEALING 3 VITH arCwER UNTIL NE
/ SUCCEEDED RARTIN As “EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR In JURE 4934 RPT JUNE 19320
“THAT: TIRE, fia ‘ASSURED US OF HIS WILLINGNESS ro COOPERATE WITH US TO
; lent FULLEST EXTENT “POSSIBLE AnD IMMED LAYELY SUPPLISD PROOF OF THIS -

i BY FURNISHING DETAILED BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION CH Gs RPT 86 AUG EES
: wen THE IRC DROUGHT To THs COUNTRYS HIS COOPERAT LON In THIS
WE HAD PRACTICALLY RO RPT NO CONTACT. U RPT

wits WIN SINCE SUMNER 3952 RPT SUMRER 1934 BECAUSE 1330 PLACED aaa

‘ THE SE ISAPPROVED? CaTEcony (ALTHOUGH a REEVALUAT.LCH is pectnsi
1992 RPT DICEMBER aya ‘TRANSFERRED. aI TO SLSHITED? SECURITY STATUS).
Wis Brcaxa RAS NEVER VOLUNTESRED IXY ORNT Los aPT Im¥ ORRAT LON OF POTENTIAL

‘| ner ‘RPT NOT", KOUEV
|
|

Br onL ad °

=)

oe:
a re ar a

oF “ALOOTNESS TOWARD HIM AMD. (By GUR FAILURE 20 eRiy Rin CONCIRN Lc “AREAS ‘

i”

' RFT AREAS OF MUTUAL INTEREST. -

vio ‘oF Thr ABOVE, WE HAVE OLY A ‘LInITEn BASIS FoR June Ie NIH,
| 3 APP RPT HE APPEARS HONEST, STRAICHTPORVARB, BISCRETY, INTELLICINT,
wont FAMILIAR WITH SOCIAL WELFARE PRACTICES BUT CORSIDEBASLY LISS.
WHOULEDCEASLE CONCERNING THE DP RPT DP COMMUNITY TiAH aks PREDECESSOR)
“vk KAVE HAD NO BEASON OP OUR GIN (AS DISTINGUISHED FROA WS0, WHOSE
suveexat APPEARS 0 BE SASED oat INFORHAT RGA SHON TO US) TO QUESTICN
His | AZPUPATION ANGEG OTHER BESETTLENUHT
TT OBGULD GS RE-EAPRAGEIND, HEUEVER,
rat UE BO BOY RPT HET HAVE SETTSCLENy sxe ume 3 Bee UIT BECEER
70 ARRIVE AT CY CGSCLESIVE SVALZET ICI @ His PRESS

nis CHARACTER Of LOYALTY»
AGENCIES APPEARS 70 BE CO0D,

‘

@). ouR SVALUAT 168 Lod Beene If


--- Page 230 ---
14-0000

i
H
|
H- _ ~

a7 FD oa

arora jkows}i/ocr

: . ‘secht - :
ee NEW TORS vSecurtty:. Taformation

70 UPA FROM ASHORAST BY ALIEN

rot, CASS 12,667. RF wy-53L. Ae FREUNDOC7ASKOWE KT TELEPHONE

CONVERSATIONS, 26 AND 27 PTARUARY 536

)

.

| - OR
:

Toy ov Sue TELFSHE p Por TYED

! cute YOU THE CUICK: ACT ;
om TR STAIN REFUSEP COMMTITER. | YER TYPO NAY qRaeMrTeen TO DD/PIS
oerTsr, TS. ADOIT Que BYALU STON
jby . OF appSM J. SecyFR.- cS

vp rep yy ag GFth L2,SST. ‘

eure Was REF

f
£ S

i
. 1 ey
: ccs Caso 12,607 oF -
Surtain Refuge? Com.) e—
hi we, ; :
a jaan ern ae
H i . nl
'
Ho
hi
i : tay
Het
jh : 2 SSESE “T
jo: . : : Breyer.
i Security caforantion



--- Page 231 ---
toon
2 i
i
}
t ‘
i] .
i
it ~
7 \
a e a
i!
«(i
if : 1&
Ty °
i a
4 Piles
| ‘1 : . Alten Branch (APCeajkowskt/ocr)
i! . ae
! . . .
1 : Case 12,667
1} .
i . ~ . : -
| 1, Info in Freund's TxY- we SB1L wae talephoned ‘to ‘Nr. Hutter
An TI/P ta office.
wy ; 26 Hulfek requested ‘additionel tora soneerning abran J. Hecker
‘ and our relations vith hin .
. .
|! 3. Faquest wes tilepsones to Freund in New Yorks
| : :
i
i
H
H Otig - Ease 12,667
af ec: Index
i
4
i t
i
i}
if
i;
i
1
1
\ .
7 .
{
i!
it .
im
<
im .
" | Sawn oo
it
'!
i
|
|
i
i
\
'



--- Page 232 ---
14-0000

Files : : ; : 26 Fed 1953
tien Brench (AFCrajkowskt/act)

Tron curtain Refugee Connittee

ey 1 On 2 Fab 3 Mr. Hulick in- the arats. office , requested

‘ {information concerning the Tron ‘Curtain Refugee Committees pacifically
he wished to learn: :

Le whet, de reletton vetwe rn vite & INC?

2. Identity of new ron wha rund ICKC.

3. To we have close relations? |
2. Czajkowskt taloohoned New Yorke Field Office and transmitted —
the remest to Walter Freund. —

3. This has beon set up es Case 12,667.

Orig ~ Case 12,667 _.
ce:

Index .
a


