
--- Page 1 ---
14-00000

104-10179-10232)

MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, Special Affaira sta

SUBJECT t AMWORLD--Project JMHART

1. Chief, WH/7 has tentatively offered the services of CLA
Contrect personnel assignedto.this project principally thoes of the
‘Director of the F Fanamerican Foundation, te
@s & channe) to ex-! resident Figueree and Foretga Minister Cduber
in promoting the acceptability of AMWORLD and AMBIDDY-1 by the
moderate left. Under the terma of the JMHART Froject, CIA. cr, through
eerie we Wilguen will be able to influence thefcomposit ton. ofthe atudent 5
of the School for b Inter-American. Development. ars propoeed od that
Wileageoald tn tell Figuerew and Cuuber that if is intended to aleo enroll
Cubane in thegechool and that in the opinion of G ieuethey should be
drawn from exile organizations known to be dedicated to democratic
principles, such as Artime's MRR, Manolo Kay's JURE, the MRP
and MDC. It ie unlikely that Figuores and Cduber would demur. In
any case, their dermurreis could be overruled. The prominent mention
of the MRK as @ cradle of democratic ideas end the actus) inclusion of
students selected by Artime would postulate acceptance of the MHKR and
of Artime ae@ exponents of a political philosophy acceptable to the mode-
rate left. Any excoriation of Artima for having allied himself with the
Semorae would be blunted if the MRR forms a part of thacstudent body
(and Contelvably the facult the faculty) of the School of 1 Inter-American Devolopmeat:

2. Tintend to suggest to Artime that he poy his respects to
Figuores in Cambridge, of course without alluding to the(school project.
The purpose of the call would, quite frankly, be to butter up Figueres.

. SECRET

| 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |


--- Page 2 ---
14-0000

SECRE

o2-

A the information J have beer able lo gather suggests that the combt-
«ation of Munos tiariu/Figueres, as far ae Vaeshinzton ie Concerned,
ig unbeatable and thet Artime has littie choice but to ali.n himself with
their way of Jooking at thinge--or at leet to pay lip service to it.

. $3. Another angie I would Like to explore te President Betancourt.
The more I read of his accomplishments ae president, tee more im-
pressedlam, Y*: hat would you think of having Artime, ormed witha
letter of introduction from Fipveres, pay Betancourt 8 call before he
relinquishes tha presidency. Artime's approach would sot be that ef a
supplicant of solicitor of susport, but that of @ young man making a
pilgrimage, sitting at the feet of a revolutionary who has been successful,
absorbing knowledge of how it wae done, He could sak Betancourt, after
be ie out from wader the daily grind of government, to addreas himself
to the problems of post-Castro Cube. He could favite him to chair a
seminar attended by the MRR leadership. The objective would, of course,
be to involve Betancourt in the affairs of the MAK, without »wftting his
sams on the masthead and without asking him to contribete anything but
reflections of his lustre ae 4 Latin American leader who bequeathed his
country @ constitutional and democratic regime. Undoubtedly Artime
will have to cast off ideolo sical ballast in order to accommodate his
reluctant sponsore (i izueres,. Betancourt), but Havana “vact bien une
mesoe.'' As & minimum objective, Artime would in any case have to
etrive to neutralise the letent animosities of the moderate left, denying
tmapolo tay an unchalienyed ascendancy in monopolizing ita support,
which he can probably cet for the asking.

4, A welcome by-product of the recuscibation of JA: HAART,
is “Combate, " an iofluential periodical with strong readership appeal
in Latina America among elements of the modorate left, edited by
Monje.) A German national named Lr. Erich Hersog who is a member
of the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD) has been Jecturiag
in San Jose on an “Ideological Inquiry into Comniunism," his program,
Andirectly sponsored by the Federal Republic, GAIT be absorbed by :

{IMHARTS lle wields considerable influonce in molding the thinking of

Central America's left of center leadership. The Firet Secretary of
the Israeli Embasey in Guatemala és also been mentioned as influential
among the intellectual elite. A Fuerto Rican named santiago Polante



--- Page 3 ---
14-0000

SECRET

(President of the Assembly) fe Munes Maria's man in eponsoring
JMHART, and ie quotes a9 having referred to Figuores eo the guiding

light, evershadowing al] others.

gen fe
Bowel?
Henry D, Heckeher
SA3/SO
ec: WH/T
SAS/SO/SB
SAS/SO/AR
BC/SAS/ MOB

SECRET

