
--- Page 1 ---
14,0000

104-10164-10112)

| 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 k.

‘
. A
. ' : '
'
'
3 i
| “
i .
tt
i 4 i «
H B . 7
: af *
f :
: \u .
| .

CHARLES,” CLEMARD JOSEPH. BANKER,
" PORT=AU-PRINCE.

OFFICIAL USE ONLY - c1asp+t62573.



--- Page 2 ---
14-0000



--- Page 3 ---
14-0000
ate

S-E-C-R-E-T so
NO FOREIGN DISSEM ; : ee
CIA INTERNAL USE ONLY

-. BIOGRAPHIC SUPPLEMENT my

HAITI

Clémard Joseph CHARLES

President and General Manager 7 :
of the Commercial Rank of Haiti

Clémard Joseph Charles, a man who has
incisted on numerous occasions. that he will
be the next President of Haiti, has been
chronically involved, directly or indirect~
ly, in rumored plots against President ~ §

-Duvalier which have never materialized.
In May 1963 Charles is reported to have
Passed word to US officials through an
4merican journalist that he was in a
position to head a provisional govern-
tent after President Duvalier had been . i
¥emoved from power. In subsequent years, particularly in 1966. H
and 1967, Charles approached US officials both in New York oy i
and Port-au-Prince with the apparent intention of enlisting : Nt
US support for a group of conspirators he claimed to lead. fo .
which was determined to topple Duvalier from power. None — soe | me
+
i
4

of these plots materialized, however, and there was never
any evidence to suggest that any serious plans had been made,

: “In Januavy 1969 Charles had a lengthy conversation with

“an official of the US Enbassy in which the former candidl =
atscussed his: grievances against Duvalier and the plot he : e

. Glaimed to be instigating to overthrow Duvalier and replace ' *
him as President of Haiti, Charles stated that the Broup | 7
supporting his efforts consisted primarily of soldiers, a
few militiamen, some professional men, priests, students,:
and assorted other well-placed individuals, He claimed
that representatives of these groups had already agreed on.
the essential elements of a constitution which would ine
@lude a bicameral legislature and an operative political

" party structure, The reporting official cautioned, how.
@ver, that Charles' remarks should be viewed in light of °.
his previous history of relating such conspiracies, .

—_—

°° When President Duvalier was reported to be seriously
+ &2L dn mid-May 1969, Charles' neme ‘was again mentioned in
Gonnection with myriad rumors of imminent government take-
‘vere, According to a reliable source, a military junce
wee formed to take power tn the event of the death of  —
Duvdster, The junta purportedly included Gen. Gérard -
Constant, Col. Octave Cayard, Col. Kugner Blain, Col, |
Roger St. Albin, end.Col, René Prosper, Charles. wee said

\ G$eB-OeR=E-T

' MO FOREIGN DISSEM. arias .
GTA INTERNAL USB. ONLY : jo



--- Page 4 ---
14-00000

fo S-E-C-R-E-T
t NO FOREIGN DISSEM ; - ee ey
‘ . CIA INTERNAL USE ONLY ; ; a, :

Clémard Joseph CHARLES (cont.)

i a - + ¢9 be aware of the identitiss of these. men. Furthermore, : . i
q 7 . according to an official of the US Embassy, at one tine ‘
, it appeared that Charles had originated the idea of the to
junta, hoping to utilize it eventually to launch his own }
H
H

_

. candidacy for the. Presidency, Subsequently, however,
Charles changed his statements about being "the next
President" to being "a future President," and he seemed . - i
to be placing some distance between himself and the pro- - :
posed junta. . _

During Charles' eforementioned conversation with an i 7 Tg et t-
Embassy official’ in January 1969, he revealed other facets _ tot
of his personality as well as his penchant for plotting. - - a .
He conceives of his role in Haiti in grandiose, almost 7 Soy _
messianic terms. He said that he had invested $2 million a oy H
in Haiti and had done more-for the development of the . . i |
country than any other indigenous Haitian, He claimed,
for example, that the workers in the Artibonite were .
passionate admirers of his because his tannery in Port :
Sondé (now closed) provided needed jobs. He also. claimed.
: yy the special allegiance of the chauffeur guides, the only
. ‘truly organized workers in the country, because when he
é@irected the compulsory Government Motor: Vehicle Insurance
program,: legitimate chauffeur claims were paid,..He im-
. plied that such claims were no longer honored... |

Discussing the internal problems of his country, -
’.” Charles stressed the need for immediate steps to prevent
the total destruction of daiti's land and resources, to .
control the spiraling population growth, and to rejuvenate |
the country's secondary cities, To achieve these goals.
before current trends become irreversible, Charles believes
that it is essential to pursue relations. with the United
‘States that would be conducive to massive assistance: and.
“ dnvestment, In this respect he insiste that Duvalier *
has been grossly unrealistic and has done Haiti great.
: damage by his refusal.co recognize the role the United”
States must play in Haitian affairs, :

DRreab

“ey 1969...

B-B-O-R-E-T

MO FOREIGN DISSEM
OTA INTERNAL USE ONLY |


--- Page 5 ---
14-0000

1
|
{
; oS {This report was developed and ‘prepared by a US Aray representative ,
4
i

i

nv : : - ; na
a CONTROLLED DISSEM i GoOetP-T-D-BotioRe Toe - NO-DISSEM ABROAD

COUNTRY Haiti — - "REPORT NO. .00~ B 321/36801~68
; Clemard Charles Statement That He Will TE DISTR,
SUBECT Attempt Davalier Overthrow Feb-Mar 69/ . | pA ost. an ~
Charles Comment On No. 2 and 3 Men In §§ wo paces 2 2 3 NEC 1983

Duvalier Regine; Confirmation by UK
Consul Generai/Weak Condition of Banque

. : C-D08- 5h

Commerciale d'Haiti/Background On Various RERENG fs : 7950 *
| Personalities and Their Present Location _— . a
; OATE OF INFO, Dec 63 . mo, ‘

PLACE & DATE ACG. Eaiti/Dec 68
THIS IS UNEVALUATED INFORMATION

SOURCE US citizen; independent businessman who has visited in Haiti for extended
periods during the past four years. He is currently attempting to promote
private financial backing for installation of generating equipment at the

> Barrage de Peligre dam and for educational television in Haiti.

.

assigned to the office of preparation. ]

1. I recently spent approximately three days in Hats (9-12 Dec 68) and
while there had extended visits with Clemard. Joseph Charles, President,
Banque Commerciale’ d'Haiti, and also owner of a sisal plantation and will.
Present during visits with Charles was his personal assistant ‘and con-

- Pidant, Ludovi elestines. Charles, a devout Catholic, personally told -

_ me that he intended to attempt to overthrow Duvalier.’\He has made specific
plans for this overthrow in late February or early March 1969. He claims
that he definitely has the Army and the Catholic ‘Church with Bim and
that the overthrow will be without bloodshed. - hey.

2. ‘I had. not intended to contact other officials or individuals in Raitt. ao a
Hovever, on the last day.of my stay I was invited to visit with Clovis © .
M. Desinor, formerly Haiti's representative to the UN and currently Dr. a
Duvalier’s Minister of Minance. He is said to be the No. 2 man in Haiti -
Rext to Duvalier. Present at the meeting with Desinor was his assistant, :
Dr. Herve Bayer and reportedly the No. 3man -

“Qe 2 first met the individuals mentioned above in 1965-66 while on an
~ extended stay in Haiti. for business purposes. I was introduced to Charles
: a driver assigned to me by the Haitian Government and whose
bar e@, was the personal scoretary for Charles. Rowe continued 7
a for me ‘on that firat.and subsequent viedts. .to Haits exvept: o
this latest visit when.he was absont.in the US. v5 os
When I first met Charles he.was President of the ‘manana Connerciale . a
- @tHadtd, owned the Sisal plantation and. mill, alco owned a tannery: .
. - f4nanecd by West German dntorosts, and was the President of the lini! Pa Se
' Chamber of Commerce and Haitian correspondent for the First’ National :
Gity Bank of New York. During’ the period upproximately. one year prior -
to June 1967, Charles put into effect'a system of Social security (0fzice ©
of National Assurance) which was working well and liked by the. Haitian

. . . rice ae enemas
OuOnNafaZ-DoWeNeTeZeAeL

Tho ditteminanion ef inie document {t limited te civitien amployest and asiive duly vary pa pervenaal within nthe intelligence comoen:sts
‘the | USIE mambor agencies, and to thave seniar offisiett of he member agensisa who mutt al upon the information, Howeres | salett speciieaily controlled
tscordence with paregeaoh 8 of DCIO.1/7; it may be releatad te those. « rent of ike depatimenis and 6 U. §. Gavermment divasily
~ pepe Ja the an ‘ef National Inielligence. If SHALL NOT 40 ‘OF SSEMINATEO: 10 CONTRACTORS, er mot Me Mitomereied te rena:
@F personnel, incleding consullanis, under @ cenlraetual rolatienihp te-the U, 3 Government witheu! the written peemiasion of the aripinder, .



--- Page 6 ---
14-00000

‘people. -He also derised an automobile insurance ‘system ‘and was’ financing a wa
this through tne Banque Commerciale a'Haits. Sy

In a period just. prior to June 1967 Duvalier was convinced by Desinor and
Boyer that Charles waa, or at least had been, plotting Duvaliers' over-
throv. Together with a derge group Charles was. imprisoned an Port-eu-Frince
from June 1967 to June 1968. . é
Just prior to the arrest of Carles, Max Rowe's wife, Raymonde, took
Us$200,000 out of the bank and hid it near Cap Haitien in th north and - .
advised Charles' wife of the location. “In addition, ‘Max Roveciains . 3 coe
\ that in June 1967 he and his wife [Raymonde Rowe is in, process of getting '
US citizenship. Max is in the US on a visitor's permit) brought papers - :
incriminating Sharlea to the US and destroyed | then.

BANK'S FINANCIAL CONDITION’

Although Charles has the bank, his poaiticn. vat. _ present is  aitricuit. rt

saw the bank belance sheet which shows assets. of US$2.9 million -but only : _

Us$29,000 (as of 10 Dec 68) cash on hand, With ‘this, sml1 amount of cach i ‘

he can no longer make loans. He says.that-he has found it necessary to : ‘

_ Bake sizeable loans to Haitians who have in turn made highly speculative
loans to others at exorbitant rates of interest. Very minor amounts of

these Loana have been repaid to the bank ent the hie current. fineactal
position. . .

‘

i 8. Charles is hopeful. that, when puvalier's. overthrow has. ‘been completed he

1 . . >’ WA&lL be able to get private financial assistance from the US. According
to Charles, US financial organizations have almost completely stopped
their assistance because of the oppressive Duvalier.Government.| _.

| .
{ :

{ 9. Charles says that Max Rowe 1s awere of his plans to overthrow Duvalier -
to. which were commnicated to Rowe by a La Bonte Jean, who is also in the .
de
|
\

Us. Charles says that the Army is unhappy with Duvalier because of the | no
_ execution ef fourteen officers after the abortive May 1966 invasion, 2
| which included Najor Toma, who was popular and powerful in his position as |
. @ Censor and in control of all foreigners coming into Haiti. Charles
maintains that the Ton Ton Macoutes are no longer a potent force - not.
operational. They have no food and are recdiving no pay.’ :

oom

i

| ee ee
{ wy got
\, ‘+ We John Pierre La La Grand, UK Consul General. in Hatt’ and Sheil 012 Genersl :
a Manager, agrees vith Charles that Desinor and Boyer are Duvaliere closest

I confidante. Fi’ (alias PritatZelgont) 18 said by Rowe and -

H La Grand to be Du acta hatchet man.” “3 is manager of the Crouplera » os
- hectgen than avers ste a ite eat eee eee ‘(Duvalter) ie: .

___ Seroneer San over, both in health end’ power L : : . :!

CoGeNePokebeielieDeReAcL


--- Page 7 ---
14-0000

DEP? OF STATE ATRGRAM (EXCERPT)
ro
DATE: © 3 AUGUST 1968

SEASSERTERYXOM: “ HATPIAN FINANCIAL STATESMEN, 11!
SUBJECT;  , -MID-1068 ;

CLASSIFICATION: NOT.KNOWN

ren

ee

ee
pa



--- Page 8 ---
14-0000

This material contains information affecting the National Detonse of the United States within the meaning of the Espionage Laws, Title
18, U S.C. Secs 793 and 794, the transmission or cevelunon ci which in any manner to an unauthonzed person is prohibited by law.

porte

1
{

CONTROLLFD DISSEM_

i CONFIDENTIAL ___; NO DISSEM ABROAD |

COUNTRY Hatt, ; : REPORT NO. 00 3A /21215-68

‘Clemmrd Joseph Charles Has Reportedly. DATE DISTR
Paid US$200 Thousand Ransom And Promised An :

 SUBIECT : : _ ee
2gsuLi9g8. © ft

Additional US$400 Thousand in Return for , NO PAGES. “) 2 a
Release frou Prison And Reinstatement As: . a4
President of Comercial Bank of Haiti REFERENCES .
DATE OF INFO. ay GY :
PLACE A DATE ACQ. we nwnenen-fFul 68 _ '
THIS IS UNEVALUATED INFORMATION __ Pee

. . . . , Z oot

SOURCE i no

; = geurtazsczas_ :
vermin erent Is limited ta'civdan eflovees and active duty millety parvoun wah i
of the usa menber mnatan of No ove vmriet alticle's of the menibel tgancies who must act upon the Yat Porronnal “within the intelngence componants

Jermahian, However, unteus specifically controlled © |
anton J of OCIO HF, a may be relsaved to suis compo.ents of tho departments and aywnive of iho US. le

I tetas ihe presennol OCD A. ny oe iowa ol BC ONGCMINATLO TO CONTRACIONE. Wt chad tet- ov dutomented fo esgomse:

Tend oF garsenne!, including consultants, under accontractuel rotekombep to tie U. & Goverrmani wuhout the writun pertustiun of the originator,

arte



--- Page 9 ---
14-0000

eM OLS . te

AO FOREN DSS ay 1968 _ |
t ~ , to .
.
i ~ oO ; ; ; - oa ‘
f , TO fockstent Cale? of Staff, Inteliinens re ;

, Depersrent of tho Any : a b :
f Attention: Gowns iegister

Interagency Source Register -.

CLEMARD, Joseph Charies gunge .°
CHARLES, Clemard Joseph... ‘

; 4. Reference is made to your request for registration dated
3 Jane 1968 concerning Subject. Youare referred to OO-E-324/  . -
06349-66 dated 14 April 1966, subject: Clemard Joseph Charles:
Believed to be President Duvalier's Personal Financial Mana; er!
Blogrophical Data oa C J Chariea; OO-A(S) 322/14068-668 dated May . we
pee subject: Clemard Joseph-Charles Must Raise US $605 Thousand a,
Before He Can Resume His Banking and Other Activities; aad OO-A(S) ee
8 dated 22 May 1968, subject; Rearrest of Clemard :
Joseph Charles/Charies Is Not Able to Raise. U8$605 Thousand Ransom/ :
Data Concerning Charles’ US Bank Accounts/President Duvalier
Might Settle for US$100 Thousand Cach/Charies Has Credit of .
U8$300 Thousaad In National Bank of the Republic of Haitiand Clans
an Additional US$i00 Thousand. Copies are attached for your retention,

/ _ 8, The Interagency Source Register has Bo record ot a.
“". + @urrent.operational interest in Subject, DCS reserves the wight to
*; . ontact Subject under the provisions of DcIpD 2/3...

| WRMH28, 910. .
. acl, 3 attachments as atated above .
RID/CE: IMA /JD/bdt

. BASEDON: 201-357029
| WILE IN: 201-357029%-



--- Page 10 ---
14-0000

i

[rata been TOY Ttter = Bil reas
. iq TS Jeerton cs 6 NUION. 2 CCHervent Che
. ce}. ent to contact subject under provistions of icID

acvious



--- Page 11 ---
14-0000

we - ; SECRET ; a

| Ae Dsl F
- ,
\

©
a

(Then Filted tn)

Do NOT USE THIS SPACE

r VINCEY 'T skew NO.
i | Ftvisa. |" Dt BENEDETTO

2-B-03

REGISTRATION REQUEST - ’ Toare a

“net. sous te ple SF a

NAME v “& ws
CLEMARDS Joseph Charles

ALIASES AND7OR SPELLING VARIATIONS 7

DATE OF GIRTH PLACE OF BIRTH Civ izenentP , . A
21 April 1923 Gonavives, Haiti . vt

General Electric Co,

and West German:

ADDITIONAL PERTINENT VOENTIFYIKG DATA

rom

N/a
C3A13938 .

1%. we

2. aubject. 2s being carried wer SLE IN so S10
ies. aO-19022 48 herehy cancelled,
gm 258

\

BECKET

i
4

1
}
_ va
[ree vole mat
Sole representative of : -



--- Page 12 ---
1714-00000

CABLE SECRETARIAT CiSSEMINATION Cusssiiep Messace Tora. Copes 2.
See ee ASSIA

“PERSONJGNIT NOTIN SECRET eestor er]
(When Filled in} a,

REPROOUC TIO. OF THIS COPY PROMBITEO

~“TING AND/OR INITIALS - SEEN BY

ADVANCE COPY oO 1ssuED oO SLOTYSO

, a at:

wor: O ves 0 wo.

CLASSIFY TO PILE NO..

AREF TO FILE NO...

ruc uo Caer. ro

" pissew ov.—_2—__ ran *

ACTION

SECRET 1916402 JUL 63 CITE PORT AU PRINCE S289 |
" DIRECTOR INFO SANTO DOMINGO, JMCOBRA Jue 6818537 4E
HEWRI SICLAIT DIRECTOR OF TOBACCO MONOPLY AND | |
INTRIGUER AGAINST CLEMARD JOSEPH CHARLES, AND WHO IS
- WOW RUMORED it DIFFICULTIES SINCE CHARLES RELEASE,
LEFT PORT AU PRINCE 17 JULY ON PANAM 234 PRESS - |
STATED PURPOSE TO VISIT WIFE'S SICK MOTHER. | S|
SECRET oo mo !

BT

3 copy.
SECRET

A.

cna mes:


--- Page 13 ---
14-0000

SECRET.

16 July 1968 |

MEMORANDUM FOR: Director,. ‘Domeatic Contact Service

- Operational Support Stati:

ATTENTION My. George 5, Musulin

SUBJECT —

DCS Case 47540 - Contact
with Louis A.. Brua:

3. Reference is made to 0 our memorandum of LY} April
1966 and subsequent communications on the subject of WH/7-
interest in-the contact which-had buen established by DCS repre=
- pentatives in New York with Louis A. Brus, This contact served
to monitor the activities of Chamard Joseph Charles, the Haitian.
Banker, whe was plotting to ovarthrow the Duvalier regime in.

2. in June 1967, Charles was arrested in Port-au-Prince
and hae spent the majority of the time. since thea:in jail. He te.
veleaced at various intervals by Duvalior apparently to give him |
the opportunity to locate more money for the regime. . Since . -
Charles foil {zum grace, it hw; become apparent that any hopes"
er plane ho may have had to overthrow Duvalier have long since —
past. Accordingly, we wish to advise that WH/7 bas no special
interoct in DCS maintaining contact with Brun to cover Charles! |

- activities. Likewise, we do not fool that there are any special

. vequizemento at this time which Brun could service vegarding

; Maitian mattera,



--- Page 14 ---
14-0000

SECRET

3. We donot, however, wish to interpose any objection
to DCS maintaining contact with Brun for its own purposes and
we would appreciate being advised of any information of signi-
ficance on Haiti which may be produced through this contact,

* DDP/WH/7/Haiti/RWBerg:klh (16 Jul 68) -
Distribution: .
Ovig & 1 - Adde

a my _ 2 « WH/7/Hs oe
: "3 © Bubj file. : :



--- Page 15 ---
14-0000

i} REYSRGNCES: (A) MY-467-68

BX -529-63

; ‘Director, Domestic Contact Service Sos 7 15 dwly 1968
ATTH 3 Operational Support Str Ousulin) = Cte,

fo Chief, Nev York Pielé Office

: Lotter from Louts A. Brim to Clemard Josuph. Guaries (to be Forwarded

‘ . Via Robert C. Pelder, United States Babansy, Port-au-Prince, Haiti)

4

(z0 June 1963); (2) comeacrs nsapaorea ‘B05h8; +

1. Reference “A” forwarded to you a letter fran Louts
A. Brun, BAB Ictermtional Corporetion, 234 Fifth Avenue, Sow.
York, tice York, to Camara Josepn Charlee, Port -eu-Prince, .
Haiti. Tis letter wee to be sent by State Dayartcent diplamtic
pouch to dir. Robert. C. Felder, United States Susbassy, Port-eu- ‘
Prince, Faiti, an@ given by him to Conrles. Brur med toldus ==.

| . (c) case 87,540
|

3. Oni oF about 26 dunn’ 1968 Bain telephoned us and stated
eit Garles bad not reveived the Letter. :

a
FS

:

Hi
+
z

vem emme ls


--- Page 16 ---
14-0000

\eccnting exbrofled

ima politics end go had refused M deliver the
We gc Gin. vfor-

We told Brn that 16 is quite prodsv.e

.

bus and tea ns that
Vie the PalésP weaned. .

849-68
‘13 duly 8B

City

Ve reported this informstica Brun,
leo
postatrs.

tra
Corp.
Fitean Ave,
Dew York, XC

Ley itself open to the charge of

Polder.
1d
7048
bas
ty

ay

Bap Int’)

to
Balt
te
Ca
recei;
ter
to Mr
dor
peruit:
not,

wish
local
etter
3.

S,2
a5 q34593

. eliieh
FE Louts A.



--- Page 17 ---
14-0000

deaneete!

i.
74
4

rn ‘ mS 1 8B INTERNATIONAL CORP. .
° oon 134 FIFTH AVENUE "
\ ° . NEW YORK, N.Y, 1008 :
es 2 Noe Gonv2ut Soscor :
- = a oo 7 fer. Aue TREE. Le

Sian Rae apo

peibisieidite

"OH tlle Sadan dad eb



--- Page 18 ---
14-0000

“Ka ehbze Sophie, ot poo ~
Cervte lettre est pour tlaceuser réception ‘des, tiennes des 17 et 26 mai aa
écoulés ct du & juin ea cours. :

e not
Si tu fitas pas eu der mes’ nouvelles abruis nen atpart dttiatt 4 le 7 mai cernier, ~
e'est que premidrenent, Je me prorosais de retcurmer voir Clémant la semaine .
suivente. Le voyage a df atre différé lorsque j'ai su que Clémard avait, A...’
nouveau, été arrété le 11 mai. J'ai méme eu & faire un cible Jun aai pour / .
iui annoncer mon arrivée et je suis sir ‘qu'il a aa tien informer.

. Duettrenent, Lerrestation de Clémard ainsi que les nouvelles dor derniers
événenents en Haiti on eu des effets négatifs sur les-nésoctations en ccurs
que j'avais entamées pour Clémara et qui semblaient vouloir wboutir.. Je niet a

“pas, besoin de te dire combien j'en ail ét touleversé. Alors qe,nos anis ~*~ 2 Taps
G@tict et moi pensions pouvoir aider Clémard que nous estimons come un frére, |

i
i
‘
|

68 nouvelle arrestation est venue nous: assommer avec une | Piguour dont nous ~
nous remettons & peine. a

: Avant d'taller plus ‘loin, jee dois te dire-que tu ne dois point vbouter de notre
“+ Qévouement pour Clémard. Il sait, et tu dois aussi le ‘savoir, que nous ne
‘| saarfens jamais marchander notre concours & un ami:ipour qui nous avors h plus t
grande affection et pour qui nous sommes préts & consentir tous les sacrifices fs
- personnels que les circonstances peuvent exiger. Je crois. devoir te dire que .
: si, en dehors d'Haiti, je n'arrive & le tirer de l'imzasse dans laquelle il se a
. _. trouve, Je dorte fort, sans feusse modestie, are quelga tun, d'autre puisse : H
réussiz Bile faire. Poe : 7 . -:
‘Nos puiseonts- anis communs tant & New York, Washington, wien et ailleurs ont’ . a { a
tous manifesté un désir sérieux de lui venir en aide dans leo limites de Leurs, foo tle
posoibilités respectives. . . :

Dopuis’ mon retour d!Heiti je ma suis mis en 1 action & cette fin. et ai pa rsonelle=
ment vu plusicurs personnalités du monde financier qui n'ent pas hésité & :
’ @onsacrer une grande partie de leur temps précteux d la concriétisation des plans:
- que J'ai cu & envisager avec Clémard en vue ‘de lo tirer A'enbarras le plus. -
oo Paptdcnent possible. a . : t



--- Page 19 ---
14-0000

" Nes espoirs de rtussite ainsi que ceux de tous les anis contactés se sont .

tation te Cidmard que ces dernicrs évéaerents survents ea Haiti depuis le

* eoura desqucls lui et moi eivisagions les moyens. dtaider Ciézard selon le “pods”

“*, Je Ist at encore cousé. récemment an téléphone et il a cu A.ne faire part des

“. @tavedr un mot encourageant de lui.

Comme ta dois le comprendre, ma chtre Sophie,. nos efforts, naleré toute. notre is

cpatyloy, on dollars anéricains, les valeurs avanedes. Stal personnellement asnisté
~ BA dea contain aves dea banquturu diiet qui oft Liment quiavant Longtenps, Malti.
| REBLAL PeOsques plua de devincaedollara pour soldex sua comptes a Liétranyer.. Autant

B.quod tien tonir,

; Concarnant, naintenant de mand, tinquter note dont’ jad eu; ‘netentne A dire A

“- QUUAL ne: pouvait an lioccurroncs intéresacr son. institution.& une ‘affoire de ce:
, Gone Qui comporte. trop de riaques.

hourtés aux effets négatics inédvitables provenant tant Ge la nouvelle arres=-

20 mat Scould., Je tteavote, pour prouve, copie dtune lebtre d'un de ces
grends anis, Mr. Nowaré Burris de Washington, D.C, Je te demande ce garder -
cette Leteve strietement confide:rticlle car je n'surais Fas ainé que le nom
do Mr, Barris soit, mentionné A quiconque en Haiti. - st ecla. errivait, nous
pourrions Fordre un. trts bon ani.

Pour ton inforiation, je te dirat que ne. Burris est un colonel retratté am 5

Corps @e Génie de L'armée axéricaince, ami personnel ‘et conseiller du, Président
Johnsvn es extrtmenent influent & Washington tant dans le, monde politique que
Tinsswter., Jtat ea & faire deux voyages & Washington entre le 8 et 11 mai ou -

envisac’.: La conte « de sa lettre au 7 juin en cours senra ‘te, confimmer ce qui

précbae.

Stat msai ve persomnellezent ‘ot lui ai causé naintes. Tots: eu téiéghone, :
Joseph Bryer, qui devait se rendre en Naiti le 2k mat pour te. vols mais quia
@Q ronvoyer’ son voyage, aprts les nouvelles de la dernitre ‘tentative d' invasion. :

‘

résultats négatifs de ses efforts, toujours en fonetion des nénes cdrcenstances.,

we Lettres adressées aux autres ante de l'étranger, dont Debitovick, par example, -
. sont restées jusqutici sans réponses. Je vais une nouvelle fois éerire longue-.

mont & Dabinovick pour lui trensmettre ta dernidre communication avec Liespoir «
4 io
bonne volenté, ne sauraient se concrétiser A brdve échfance, car les valeurs en-
qucation qu'il nous faut trouver ne sont pas insimifiantes. . Je te sicnalerai en
passant wi-point quia été soulevé au cours dea négociations et: qui fait ressortir, ©
qua mia ai nos vnin seraiont on mesure dtavancor’d Cldmand les valours nécesenires,
fla ont ded doutca stricux non pas our la sineérité de Cldmard.d faire foce aux,
odlinationd qui devront Stre cantractées, mais X la. posutvilité matérielle de ram:

3

debataehua yuo jo auia. malheurousoment obligd de te signoler pour que tu saches

a

Clémard que je croyais pouvoir nous alder, zeluiest a.qu'A me foire comprendre i

De co cOté 1k aa aty a done pas. grand, espoir.

- seoner “ sony on

om



--- Page 20 ---
14-0000

‘Ceck ats, malgré tous ces obstacles gui sembleraient incurmontadles, je niat

‘ GtHaiti, pour implorer sa clémence et sa générosité pour un emi qui nous est cher.
’ @e 1'épargner et, dans le doute, j'ai préférer miabstenir.

: Pour revenir maintenant eux possibilités de féaliser au moins pertiellenent, ‘la
" valeur exicée, je dois te dire que jo suis heureux de savoir que tu détiens une

- , Rous pourrions entreprendre & cgtte fin, oa : ”
, Séparénent, par cette méme vole, je te conmintquerat toutes les fornslités a
. le tiers dé la ‘somme réclemée. Il serait souhaitable que tu sois mise en mesure

. plus vite.
> Ma chare ‘Sophie, je termineraid: cette lettre a4ga, longue et cerdue en 1 te renoue =

| de ma fenille pour Clémard, tod, et, les tiene.
Agfactions a Grossitehe, VertexClasdine, Tote, Badte ¢ et aa . fomne. ;

pas totslenent perdu l'espoir de pouvoir tteider & sortir Clénard, sain et fo

souf, ¢e la prison ob sa santé se détériore rapidencnt, je Ic sais. L'essentiel on ie
est que le Chef lui-name soit persuadé que Ltanhabdsiité que nous Gprouvons a oo4e
sitisfaire les exigences du moment, ne sont en aucune, fagon inputebles & Clémard - .
nais plutes & des cizconstances -totalement. iadépendantes ae notre volonté. vy

Je pric Dieu ‘Tout~putasant pour que l'on finisse par réaliser que Clémard, en
bon patsiote ‘haTtien, a eu foi en son pays et n'a ‘pas cru bon dlexpatrier, comme
plus fun l'a fait, le fruit de ses durs lebeurs ct de -son Antelligence Pro-
ductive. aa

- . : .
Je me propesais “avéertre ‘personnellemont & Son Excellence 3 le Président a Vie

Je me suis alors demandé si c'était 1a un geste sase qui pourrait avoir le verti!

procuration générale en bonne et due forme’ ‘rhabilitent a ratifier tout ce me :

remplir pour nous mettre en mesure de rfaliscr dans un délai roisonable au moins.

de venir ici & New York, ce qui Yaeiliterait beoucoup les choses, mais dans l'ine
possibilité d'une pareille alternative, tu devras done agréer-aux conditions |
stipulées. Il faudra donc “erseves diligence pour nous pemettre @ @aller a

velant mon dévouenent le-plus entier & la couse de notre ani Clémard et en te.
priant use nouvelle fois de ne jomais douter de mes sentiments, -Propres” vet ceux



--- Page 21 ---
14-0000

SUITE 101, R.G.A. BUILDING
1725 & STREET. NL Ww.
WAS*UNGTON, D.C. 20006

“June 7,:-1968

Nr. Lowis A. Brin
RL Tete eenb ee it Capp,
: 408 ritcu avenue ‘ _
<. New York, New York 10011" -

se

, . Dear Mr. Brun .

r apolocize for the delay in responding to ‘your -
+ sSuagestion concerning the commercial bank ‘in Haiti.
"My activities here hive been such that I have been.
“unable until the past day or so to give your pro-
posal adequate thought and consideration." .

ae we

~ First I must admit that the recent abortive ‘invasion.

_ attempt caused cortain reflection and it. is this~

. kind of activity, succouaful or unsuccessful, that _

- eould ere o serious dinleeations: for those established.
in business. iiwwevar I must assure you that. this was
oply a refte:.clon and the reason that I will:be unable
. 80 accep. your ofier is the extent and nature of my
activities hore in Nanhington. I believe I: alluded
se some of thom curing your visit. The secasions when
Eewonld tind i¢ possibls to visit. Port-au;Prince or ta
‘deve. anv afiendfieane amount of time ,to: the. bank's
eoavition nace woudd bu ruse indeed; i. saall conless
o you'that I declined a similar position:on a. bank
Heard here in the suates for the same reason. —

regret that thia “oetedon- is necessary: but it hope
hat in future roalationships wa may be abla to: do
moth ing usaful and: successful in Hadith.’ :

Qo sincerely...


--- Page 22 ---
14-0000

1) -Envoye ¥, signe par Sophic, ‘un mandat ori ginal notarie et
ile -galise par le Consul Americain, a une personne amie ous
: parent habitant New York, donnant a. cette. personne les
‘ nenes pouvoirs. donnes par Clemard ‘a Sophie. Ce mandat
devra etre _accompagne ‘dtune copie authentifiee ‘de colut
de Clemard.a Sophie. . _ ‘
- 2) Wavoyer les clefs des deux "safe deposit box" qui se _
*  exouvene a la First National City Bank avec.les formes | e
attacheed qui doivent aussi etre legalisees par le consul
" americain. : co . . _ we, ;
“al 3) ‘Inddiquer ‘le nom et la fonction de la personne: autorisee :
par le gouvernement haitien a regler le ‘transaction. avec
‘Clemard pour ‘communication eventuelle relative a la tran- ‘

saction. \

oo

eves ececcose
a

Ma chere Sophie: . Le ot

Cette communication te parviendra par une vote. qua..Clemard
‘a eu-a mtindiquer et que je crois etre sure. Fais bien atten
_ tion a ce qu'il n'y ait pas dtindiseretion, .

“In voudrats suggerer que tu habilites Paulette selon le
_ Paragraphe i ci-dessus. .

‘Jett envote aussi ‘par cette meme vole une lettre qui saura
te renseigner sur Ltetat de nos demarches et possibilites,

- Encore una fots, Bon Courage et bonjour atous.. |

eo

Invariablement ,

t


--- Page 23 ---
“FIRST NATIONAL CITY BANK .
, SARE BEPpelt ORPARTMENT

i

ope

GIGNATURE OF OSPUTY

ADORESS OF DEPUTY

Sane ©: anaes STORIES)

Td

| SECRET

"ea ast okay



--- Page 24 ---
14-0000

“78 nave nccuae 10.Ano COWTMOL OF THE SONTENTS OF 4nPe HO. NOW RENTED DY.
in Tug vauer or FIRST: NATIONAL CITY BANS, sare

DEPOSIT DRPARTMENT AT xe, NEW vonk, £0 EXCHANGE SAID GAFE FOR
ANY NEW SAFE OR SAFES IN GAID VAULT AND FROM TINE TO TIME TO MAKE LIKE EXCHANGES,.AND IN MY
" MAME ANG ON MY BEHALF TO EXECUTE A LEAGE OF ANY BUCH IEW WAPI Of SAFES UAON SUCH TERMO AG
WE MAY DEEM PROPUR AND TO. NAVE AGGESS TOANO CONTROL OF THE CONTENTS.OF ANY GUCH NEW Gare :
OR GAFES, AND TO RECSIVE ALL THE LEoeGt's KEYG TO ANY SUCH NEW SAFE OR SAFES, WITH POWER AT.-

ALL TIMES TO QURAFNDER THE GAID GAFE NO. AMD ANY. SUGH NEW SAFE OR BAFEG: THIS AU |
~ “YHORITY TO REMAIN IN FOROT UNTIL WRITTEN NOTICE OF ITS REVOCATION.IS RECEIVED OY THE BAIT BANK,

a a
1


--- Page 25 ---
14-0000

(0 UNCLASSIFIED’

SUBJECT: (Options!)

O

L

Pa - OD) CONFH © NTIAL (K) SECRET

ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET

COMMENTS (Number each comment to show from whom
fo whom. Oraw G line cross column after each comment.)


--- Page 26 ---
14-0000

an ed

. 12 July 1968

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD |
SUBJECT: Letter from Louis A. Brun to FSO Felder -

1 1 talked with George Musulin “(pc8/ops. Support| .
Staff) at 0840 hours this morning about the letter mailed :
to FSO Felder at the American Embassy in Port au: Prince, -. “
Musulin said that he had spoken with Brun absut the letter
and Brun had assured him that Felder suid to mail letters
to him through Foreign Service mail channels.:.Brun.is in
contact with Felder during his visits to Haiti and.this -
system was laid on between then dur ing one of his trips. :

2. Brun also ‘paid that: he: was a little upset ‘about ”

- the problems which ‘had arisen. in sending his- letter. Brun
-gaid that he had received a letter from Felder (mailed in.

New York City) saying that he had never. received theletter :”
. from Brun. Brun was concerned that the letter. may -have

fallen into the wrong hands in Haiti. Musulinisaid that

he would try to recover the letter and send it back to

Brun. - : . :

83 fF toxa Mustlin that Ambassador Ross was! very much ©.
disturbed about this matter and that any. further involve-
ve ee ment by the Agency with correspondence between Brun and.
So, Felder should be avoided. Brun is a business agent of 7
aan * Clemard Joseph-Charles and thus any correspondence between.
Brun and an official of the American Embassy is of parti-
cular concern to the Ambassador because of the obvious
- political implications. Musulin said he understood this
and would tell Brun that the dispatch of any correspondence ——
-. dm the future would be his own responsibility. < .



--- Page 27 ---
14-0000

[1 gINCEASSIFIED ~ pometuat OF or
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET

SUBIECT; (Optional)

Clemaid Josepa Charles

GSMusulin/om yon
DCS/Operational Support Staff

ry
900 Key Bldg. :
. : ’
i COMMENTS (Number sach comment to show trom whom .
i fo whom. Orewa line ocrets column after each comment.) .
: : i
j a 1
boo fy , Le ‘
ol ve For your information. as



--- Page 28 ---
14-0000

_ | Barector, Domestic Contact Service | , "45 July 1968
ATIN : Operational Support Stafr (Muulin) .

Chief, New York Field Office

Letter from Louis A. Brun to Clemara Joseph Charles (to be Forvarded _ oe
_ Via Robert C. Felder, United States Eubassy, Port-au-Prince, Haiti) —

REFERENCES: (A) HY-467-68 (20 Tune 1968); (3B) couracro Ansan So5M85 , of
_ UC) Case 47,540 a

1. Reference "A" forwarded to you a4 letter from Louta’ ae
A. Brun, B&B International Corporation, 134 Fifth Avenue, New ..
York, Ncw York, to Clemrd Joseph Charles, Port-au-Prince,
Eaiti. This letter was to be sont by State Department diplomtic
pouch to Mr. Robert C. Felder, United States Bsbassy, Port-au-
Prince, Haiti, ari given by him to Charles. Brun, had aug,
that Felder had agreed to act as intermediary ior correspondence ~
Detween himself and Cuarles and added that.he and Charles, had
already used the system. The letter in Reference, AN was the’.
first time we bad been approached in the matter. to

2. Reference. "B" stated that the letter: hea been, atepatched
vin Wessage Center Courier to the Btate Deyartaent oh 2h: June

3. On or about 2 Sune 1968 Brun telephoned us end’ tated te
that Charles bad. not received the letter. We telephoned ‘Mr .
Musulin, who double-checked and assured us that the letter’ had.
sone Bo the State Dapartnent and that .€; should go out: the .

1963 he Yad vencived © telephone call from 'aRay
Alvares identified himself as a State Department

return the. letter. if'Brun-vould tel) him how 16 *had' reached ‘the *
Obate Department. Brun refused to. give Alvares any: informations .
We then telephoned Mr. Musulin and relayed the foregoing in- .
formation. Mr. Musulin inquired inte the matter and. learned
that the letter had gono.to Haiti. inthe State. Depsrtuunt
tnd not been dolivered to Felder and.had been returned to.
Washington. He. and.ve. ‘nsurniged that tho State- Departzent. OL4:



--- Page 29 ---
14-0000

_ dn local Mattian politics and co had rofused tr. deliver the

_ FILE: Loute Ay Brun

not wish to lay itself open to the charge of heconing embroiled
letter to Feldor. We reported this information ¢o Brun. .

§. On 12 July 1968 Brun telephoned uo and tole us that
he had received o letter trom Charles via the Folder channel.
Ghia letter bore a New York City pootimrk. We gave. thie infor-
mation to Mr. Musulin. We told Drun that tt io quite probavia
that Felder has a personal arrangement with unknown parties
which permits him to use the diplomatic pouch facilities. Since
we do not, letters can go only from Charles to Brun end not
from Brun to Charles. Brun and we agreed that he vill not
henceforth attenpt tu use Velder to send letters to ‘Charles.

6. Me. Musulin agreed to retrieve the letter fram the’
‘Btate Departinent and to.send it to us. We ohall return it
forthwith to, Brun. ; : ae

; Jackson R.. Horton:
gMitcheliseh. ;

ESB Int'l Corp.

13h Fifth Ave.

New York, NY . /
“ gnd case 47,5000



--- Page 30 ---
14-0000

LES

ay Coe

rant Jose

RC

cone,
— Mae
foer -

NEW YORK, N. ¥, 10088

B & & INTERNATIONAL
134 FIFTH AVENUE

-~-
eerie

ad

.
ne eee

4
7)
TRICE

tte



--- Page 31 ---
14-0000

‘Cette lettre est pour t'accuser réccption des tiennes des 17 et 26 mai

New York, N.Y. WE gt) Gua age

‘Mme Clémaré Joseph Charles

Port-au-Prince
Haiti

“Ma. chive Sophie, : fat

@coulés et du 4 juin en cours.

. . . ow
St tu ntas pas eu de mes nouvelles depuis mon départ d'Haiti le 7 mai dernier,

“ e'est que premigrement, je me proposais de retourner voir Clémard la scmaine

suivante, Le voyage a di ttre différé lorsque jtaf su que Clémard avait, &
nouveau, été arrfté le 11 mai, J'ai méme eu & faire un'chble & un ami pour
lui annoncer mon arrivée et Je suis ofr qu'il a da tien: ‘informer,

Tueitmement, Larrestation de Clémard ainsi que les nouvelles der dorniers

_ 6vénements en Haiti on eu des effete négatifs sur les négoelations en cours

que j'avais entamées pour Clémard et qui semblaient vouloir aboutir, Je n'ai.

‘pas, besoin de te dire combien j'en ai été bouleversé., Alors que. nos emis

d'ici et moi pensions pouvoir alder Clémard que nous estimons comme un frére, .
6& nouvelle arrestation est venue nous assommer avec une: rigueur dont nous :
nous remettons & peinc, . . : .

“Avant a'taller plus Yotn, Je: ‘dota te dire que tu ne dois point douter de notre
. G@évouement pour Clémard. Tl sait, et tu dois aussi le savoir, que nous ne,
' gaurtons jamais marchander notre concours & un ami pour qui nous avons b plus
* grande affection et pour qui nous somes prats & consentir tous les sacrifices
~ personnels que les circonstances peuvent exiger.’ Je crois:devoir tu dire que ©

ei, en dehors d'Haiti, Je n'arrive A lc tirer de 1! impasse’ ‘dans laquelle 11 se
trouve, Jo doute fort, sana fausse modestie, que quelqu ‘un. ‘ateutre * putese- 7
réussir & le faire. , ‘ !
‘Nos puissantes: amis communs tant & New York, Washington, Miami et ailleurs ont. .
tous manifesté un désir séricux.de lui venir en aide dans des limites de leurs

possibilitée respectives. ‘ .

Depuis mon retour 4'Haitd Je me suis mis en action a cette enh et at personelle~
mont vu plusiours personnalités du mondo financier qui n'ont héoité a
’ goneacrer une grande partie ue leur temps précieux & la concrétiration dus plans.

que j'ai eu A envisager aved Clémard en wie de le tirer dVenbarras le plus
Sepidement possible, .

ha



--- Page 32 ---
14-0000

; » page 2

Nes espoirs de réusoite ajnei que ceux de tous les ‘amis. contactés se sont
heurtés eux effets négatifs inévitablea provenant tant de la nouvelle arres=
tation de Clémard que des derniers événements survenus en Halti depuis le
20 mai écoulé. Je tlenvoie, pour preuve, copie d'une lettre d'un de ces |
erenis anis, Mr. Howard Burris de Washington, D.C. Je te demande de garder
cette lettre strictement confidenticlle car je n'aurais pas‘ainé que le nom
de Mr. Burris soit montionné A quiconque en Haiti. Si ecla’ arrivait, nous
pourrions perdre un trés bon ami. .

Pour ton information, je te dirai que Mr. Burris est un colonel retraité tu
Corps de Génie de l'armée américaine, ami personnel et conseiller du Président —
_Johnson et extrémement influent & Washington tant dans le monde politique que”
financier, J'ai eu & faire deux voyages & Washington entre le. 8B et 11 mat ou 5
cours desquels lui et’ moi ervisagions les moyens d'aider Clémard selon le “modus"-
“onyisacé. La copie ‘de sa lettre du 7 juin en cours saura te. confirmer co aud ‘
rn de. . tot. ~ . . ; a

J'ai aussi vu persbnneLlement: et lui ai causé naintes tots « au ‘téépnone,

Joseph Dryer, qui devait:se rendre en Haiti le 2h-mai ‘pour te vois mais qui a
.@@ renvoyer son voyage aprts les nouvelles de la dernitre tentative d'invasion.
Je lui ai encore causé récemment au téléphone et il a eu: AX me faire part des
résultats négatifs de ses efforts, toujoura en fonction des nemes circonstances.,

Le lettres adressées eux autres ents de L'étranger, ‘dont Dabinovick, par exemple,
sont restées jusqu'ict. sans réponses. Je vais une nouvelle fois éerire longue-"
ment & Dabinovick pour lui transmettre ta dernitre conmunteation. avec @ Ltespoir
G'avoir un mot encourageant de lui. . . owe
‘ Comme tu dois le comprendre, ma chtre Sophie, nos. efforts, maigis ‘goute notre”
Bonne volonté, ne sauraient se concrétiour & brave échéance, carles valeurs en— a“
question qu'il nous faut trouver ne sont pas insignifiantes. Je te eignalerai en on
. passant un point qui a été soulevé au cours des négoctations et qui fait ressortir ~
que méme ei nos amin seraient en mesure d'avancer A Clémard:les val.eurs ndécessaires,
dle ont des doutes eérioux non pas sur le sincérité de Clémard &.feire face aux
obligations qui devront étre contractées, mate & la possibiiité. matérielle dere.
a. trier, en dollars américnine, les valeurs avanctes. J'ai personneliement assisté
des contacts avec des banquiers A'tot qui affirment qu'avant longtemps, Halti .
ntaura presquesplus de doviscs-dollars pour solder ses comptes; a l'étrange> « Autant .

Atobstacles que je suis melheureusenont obligé. de te stgneler pour que tu sashes
B.quod tien tenir. :

t
Concernent maintenant ie grant thnayler noi dont ‘stat eu not-néne A atre dk.
Clémard que je croyais pouvoir nous aider, celuieci a eu.& me faire comprendre: ~
qutil ne pouvait an Ltocourrence intérescer son. institution & une. affaire de:ce |
_ Genre mut sonporte trop de risques, ‘De cea abté al il. nya a ena; pas grand potry

a



--- Page 33 ---
14-0000

Page 5

Ceci dit, malgré tous ces obstacles qui sembleratent insurmontables, je n'at
pas totalement perdu ltespoir de pouvoir t'aider & sortir Clémard, sain et a '
sauf, de la prison of sa santé se détériore rapidement, je le ania. L'essentiel ; :
est que le Chef lui-mime soit percuadé que 1'inhabilité: ‘que nous éprouvons B a t-
atisfatre les exigences du moment, ne. sont en aucune racon imputables A Ci¢mard .

mais plutét & des circonstances totelement indépendentes. de notre volonté. ‘

Je prie Dieu ‘Tout-puissant pour que i'on finisse par ‘péaliser. que Clénara, en .
bon patriote. haftien, a eu fot en son pays et n'a pas. cru bon d'expatrier, comme . 7
plus d'un l'a fait, le fruit de ses durs labeurs ot ‘de son intelligence pro= : .
ductive.

Je me proposais a*écrtre ‘personnellement & Son Excellence ‘le Président & Vie : :
@'Haiti, pour implorer sa clémence et sa générosité . pour-un.emi qui nous est’ cher,
ye me suis alors demandé si c'était 1A un geste’ sage qui pourrait avoir la vertu

de 1'épargner et, dans le doute, dtat préférer miabstenir, - a

Pour revenir maintenant aux possibtlitée de #aliser au moins partietlenent, la
valeur exigée, je dois te dire que Je suis haureux de savoir que tu détiens une .
procuration générale en bonne et due forme trhabilitant, a ratifier tout ce qe ya,
nous pourrions entreprendre Acette fin, - : . . | 1
.
Séparément, par cette mtme vole, je te commniquerat ‘toutes les formalités a - woop
remplir pour nous mettre en mesure de réaliser dans un délat raisonable au moins ..° .  {
ie tiers de la some réclemée, Il serait souhnitabdle que tu sois mise-en mesure os.
de venir ici A New York, co qui facilitorait beaucoup les choses, mais dans lt im= §-
posaidilité d'une pareille alternative, tu devras done agréer. aux conditions . :
stipuléss. 11 feudra’ donc egir, avec atnitgence pour and permettre Gtaller au
plus vite. .
x

-.' Ma chare Sophie, je termineral cette lettre déj& longue et ariue en te renou=
velant mon ddvouement le plus entier & la cause de notre ami -Clémard et en te.
priant une nouvelle fois de ne jamais douter de mes sentinents, Propres et ceux

Ae ma famille pour Clémard, toi et ies tiens,
_ Affections Ly Gree-Miche, Narie-Clanding, Toto, baste et aa, fenne,

. ‘Yon courage!



--- Page 34 ---
14-0000

4
;
|
HOWARD L.BURSIS ¢

© SYITE LOL R.C.A. Bu ONG
1726 K STREET, N. w.
WAS4INGTON,0.C, 20006

. dune 1, 1968

‘ . . .

Mr. Louis A. Brin

RL tet ewnabdee it Aarp, . _ i an Lo
£54 Faced avenue ‘ eet

New York, ‘New York 10011" :

Dear Mr. ‘Brun ot

b 4 apolovize for. the delay. in ‘responding to” your’ - .
suagestion coneerning the commercial bank in Haiti...

_ My activities here hive been such that I have been. —

. unable until the past day or soto give your pro- |
posal adequate thought and consideration.

First. I. must admit that the recent ‘abortive’ invasion:
- attempt caused certain reflection and it. is- this

kind of activity, successful or unsuccessfus;: that
~ gould ere co ser‘aus dislocations for those established
_ dn business., iuwevar I must assure you that:-this was —
only ‘a reflection and the reason that f willbe unable .
to accer: your offer is the extent and nature of my
tivities here in Wanhington. I believe I alluded os
to some of thom during your visit... The oceasions when
“IZ would tind it posrnible to visit Port-au-Prince or to
eves anvoaientfirint amount of eima to the bank's
actavitics nere would In race indeed.; 1 shall: contess
“go you that I declined a similar. position: on a bank
- board here in the states. for the same reaso .

deren ang tt

-2 regret that this ‘deeiaion is necessary. but 2 shops
that in future‘ rolationships we may be able to. ao.
somoth ing useful and success2ul in Haiti.®

~ ghncerely,,

_ Shela nen



--- Page 35 ---
1400000,

FORMALITES. A REMFLIR FAR SOFRIE:

BN ewww ew wee comme ween eesneees

1) Envoyer, signe par Sophic, un mandat original notarie et

, legalise par le Consul aAmericain, a une personne amie ou’

parent tabitant New York, donnant a cette personne les

tmemes pouvoirs donnes par Clemard a Sophie. Ce-mandat. = ~ :

devra etre accompagne d'une cople authentifiee ‘de celui.
a eo

de Clemard a Sophie.

a?) Havoyer les clefs des deux "safe deposit: ox qui se
trouvent a la First National City Bank avec les formes
a . attacheed qui doivent aussi etre legalisees par le consul a (-
: * americcin. —_ a . my _ - a
- $3) Inda&quer le nom et la fonction de la personne autorisee .
_ pax le gouvernement haitien a regler la transaction avee a
wee Clemard pour communication eventuelle relative ala tran- _
_ vo -  Baction. . ; ; ee ,

NS

seeeeecocncoen

. Ma chere sophie: oe _

Cette commmication te parviendra par une vole ‘que Clemard = |:
a eu a m'indiquer et que je crois etre sure, ‘Fate -bien atten-:
tion a ce qu'il n'y ait pas d'indiscretion. _.

Je voudrais ifugserer que tu habilites. Paulette: selon le.
pavagraphe 1 “dessus. .

Je t'envole aussi per cette meme: voie une. lettre qui saura °
te renseigner sur ‘etat de nos demarches “et possibilites. :

Encore une fois, Bon Courage at. ‘bonjour a ‘tous.

Tavariabl enent ,


--- Page 36 ---
FIRST NATIONAL city BANK
SAFE DEPOSIT DEPARTMENT

“THE SIGNATURE APPEARING ABOVE I8 THAT OF:
WHO HAS BEEN AUTHORIZED TO HAVE ACCESS TO’ ears. NOt 7a
VAULTS OF YouR BANK, :



--- Page 37 ---
14-0000

= . eee ee ee

‘
i
f
sf
r
=
é

"FO NAVE ACERS TO ANO CONTROL OF THE CONTENTS OF SAFE NO. NOW RENTED BY
ne ene vaunr of FIRST NATIONAL CITY BANS . sare

, Berosir DEPARTMENT AY. NEW YORK, TO EXCHANGE SAID SAFE FOR
. ANY NEW GAFE OR GAPES IN GAID VAULT AND FROM TIME TO TIME TO MAKE bike EXCHANGED, AND IN MY
‘ WAME AND ON MY BEHALF TO EXECUTE A LEAGE OF ANY SUCH NEW CAFE OR SAFES UPON SUCH TERMS AG
HE MAY DCEM PROPER AND TO HAVE ACCESS TO AND CONTROL OF THE CONTENTS OF ANY BUCH NEW SAFE.

- OR SAPKO, AND TO RECKIVE ALL THE LESEEE'S KEYS TO ANY SUC 4 NEW SAFE OR SAFER, WITH POWER AT.
: Able TIMES TO GURAENDER THE GAID GAFZ NO.. =AND ANY SUGH NEW SAPE.OR SAFES; THIS AUe
“HORITY TQ REMAIN IN PORCE UNTIL, WRITTEN NOTICE OF ITS REVCCATION I8 RECEIVED BY. THE SAID DANK,

ONE THOUSAND NINE ,HUNORED AND

DAY OF

. eavong MEGANE; |) . :
7O ME KNOWN TO BE THE INDIVIDUAL SIKSGRIBGD IN: ANO WHO EXEGUTED, THE FOREGOING INOTAUMENT, |

. . peter ey a :

2



--- Page 38 ---
14-00000

- J uncuassipieb’ =) MM, CO conrr—stian. sR) Secret



--- Page 39 ---
14-0000

iy SECRET

12: July 1968

WEWORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

SUBJECT: Letter from Louie A. Brun to 780 Polder

. 1 talked with George Musulin (DCB/Ope Bupport

Staff) at 0840 hours this morning about the lotter astiod

to FSO Felder at.the American Embassy in Port au Prince,

- fWusulin said that he had spoken with Brun about the letter

and Brun had asuured him that Felder suid to nat} Jottors
to hip through Foreign Service mail channela. Brun te in.
contact with Felder during hia visita to Haiti and this
gysten was laid on between them during one of hia trips.

2. Brun also said that he was a little upset. about
the problems which had arisen in sending his letter. Brun
eaid that he had received a letter, from Felder (matioed in
New York City) saying that he had never received tho. letter
from Brun. Brun was concerned that the letter pay have
fallen into the wrong hands in Haiti. Musulin said that

_ he would try to recover the letter and send it. back to

3, 1 told Musulin that Ambassador Ross was very much
@isturbed about this matter and that any further involve-

_ ment by the Agency with correspondence between Srun and

Felder should be avoided. Brun is a business agent of

Clemard Joseph-Charles and thus any correspondence between .

Brun and au official of the American Embassy is of. parti-
cular concern to the Ambassador because of the obvious
political. smolicationa, Musulin said he understood this.

in the future would be ‘his own responsibility. —

| SEORET

and would toll Brun that the dispatch of any cerrespondence —

tae ene Sete ee Re BUFSOL te QUEM

e



--- Page 40 ---
14-0000

CL BNCASSIFIED py CO comn*niia =) secret

ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET

Dcs/Operational Suppors Start
900 Key Bldg.

4

ingot Mena cieabe ed =

b,

: ne Oo SECRET ao CONFIDENTIAL QO

IWTERNAL a
wcony FIED

Sates!


--- Page 41 ---
14-0000

. —
i . Sd CHET “ :
i a wr -529-68 Py
ATER 5 Uperobiocel Saqyert Stars (susulia) oe oo fo '
: ; . Fo
Chins, Bow York Pelé Orrtee r de 4
cod. 2 :
te Fook
letter fron lauts A. run to Clowaré Joseph Caries (vo be Porvartes . yaa. ’
. Vin habert Ge Folder, United States Enbassy, Port-cu-Prince, Hosts) 4
2 {

‘evens (a) i“ 467 48 (2 Sune. 3968); (3) counAcre AOR 8 Basha;
(Cc) case 47,540

4

FRREN RE Je apnttse and Leann!

‘

i. Reference “A” forvarded to you & letter: from Louis
&. Brun, BAY International Corporation, 134 Fifth Avenue, Mew -
York, We Yuck, to Clonmrd Juseps Cuarles, Purt-eu-Prince,  -
Batti. Thies loster vasa to Lo cont by Utate Doyartaont dtplamtic |”
to Mr. hiwert C. Felder, United States Rabasey, Port-au- —
» Units, ana elven by him to Charles. Urun had told us
ty Yoldor hed agreed to act as intenedlary tor correspondence |
Detvecn Lilnsel® and. Charles and added that he end Charles had
weed the syotes, The ietter in lteference “A” vas the
Stret tine ve ‘md been approached in the mtter.

8. Reference “5 stated thet the letter had been  atepasened
vin Mecenge Conter Courter to the Btste ‘Departnant on 24 June
1968.

3. On or about 26'Sune 1968 run telephoned us and stated
Chat Charles bad not recoived the letter. We telephoned Mr.
: Musulis, who double-checked and ascured us that the letter had.
Soe B5 She Dente Departuens and thet 1¢ should go out An ting
~ Bext pouch.

Gestined for Charles. | Alverer then told.
seturn the letter if Brun vould tell hin

formation. Mr. Musulin inquired inte
. that the letter had gone to Haitd in the
tad not been delivered to Folder and had
Washington. He and ve suraised. that the

Ne ees De TEENS Mem yet



--- Page 42 ---
14-0000

“eCRET a ose

ms

15 day 198 | “
tot wish to lay itself open to the charse of tecoaing exbrotled :
fin local

Haitian politics end so bad refused t\ deliver the
to Felder. We reported this information ¢o Brun.

. On 12 July 1963 Brun telephoned us and tole us that
received a letter from Charles via the Folder channel. :

x bore a Hew York City postmark. We gave thie tnfar- :
to Mr. Musulin. We told Brun that it is quite probate [
4er bas @ personal srrangesent vith unknown parties
mits him to use the diploastic pouch facilities. Since
;, letters can go only from Charles ‘to Brun,and not. :
Brun to Charles. Brun and ve agreed that he will not ,
forth atteupt to use Felder to send letters to Charles. =

6. Mr. Musulin agreed to retrieve the: Letter from the 4
Fertinite te Beene > Pend 26 to use, We shall return it :
fortinith to Brun. Be ‘

5
§

giggupe
[ DHBEe



--- Page 43 ---
14-0000

Go 936 FISTH AVEWUE

+
.
. -
.
. Lae
a
. .
Be .
mee : peepee te tt tN


--- Page 44 ---
14-0000

1 my Be

» seme

‘pas. besoin de te dire combien J'en ai &té bouleversé. Alors que, nos amis

“Avant d'aller plus loin, de ‘gots te dire -que tu ne dots point douter de notre”

"Nes putesants ants commns tant & New York, Washington; Miami et atieurs ont

> Depris mon retour d'Haitd je me suis mis en action & cette tin et at personelle-
-, ment vu plusieurs personnalités.du monde financier qui n'ont pas. hésité &

: " qe j'ad eu A envisager aved Clémard en wue de lo tirer dienberras, de Plus

ie ten ny. . Le 1 sutn 968°

Mme Ciézard Joseph Charles
Port-au-Prince.
Haiti

Ma chére Sophie, , po, 7 ~
Cette lettr-: est pour t'accuser réception des tiennes des. 17 et 26 mal -
Ecoulés et du 4 Juin en cours.

e
Si wo n'as pas eu ae mes nouvelles depuis mon aépart ¢ a" Haiti le 7 mai dernier,
east que presiarement, Je me proposais de retourner voir’ ‘Clémard la semaine .
suivante. Le voyage a dQ etre différé lorsque j'ai su que Clémard avait, & |.
nouveau, été srrété le 11 mai. J'ai méme eu A faire un cAble A un ami pour ©
lui annoncer non arrivée et je-suis sQr qu'il.a dQ tien. informer.

Dueiteement, Larrestation de Clénard ainsi que les nouvelles der derniers :
événenents en Haiti on eu des effets négatifs sur les négociations en cours -
que j'avais entanées ‘pour Clémard et qui semblaient vouloir aboutir. Je n'ai

@tict et moi pensions pouvoir aider Clémard que nous éstimons comme un frére,
ga nouvelle arrestation est venue nous assommer avec une’ rigueur: ‘dont nous
nous remettons & peine, |

@évouement pour Clémard. I] sait, et tu dois aussi le savoir, que nous ne ~
sSaurions jemais marchander notre concours A‘un ami pour qui nous evens 2 plus
@rande affection et pour qui nous sommes préts A. consentir tous les’ sacrifices
personnels que les circonstances peuvent exiger. Je crois'devoir te dire que
ei, en dehors G'Haiti, Je n'arrive Ale tirer de l'impasec dans laquelle il se
trouve, je doute fort, sana fausse nodestie, que suelqatun da'autre puisse |
réussir & le faire. .

een
--

tous manifesté un désir sérieux de dui venir en aide dans ies limites de leurs,
possibilités respectives.

:

consacrer une grande partie ue leur temps préckeux & la concrétisation des plans |
Feptdenent possible.


--- Page 45 ---
14-0000

sgn its

Page 2

Hes espotrs ¢ de rfussite eins que ceux de tous’ les amis contactés se sont
heurtés aux effets négatifs inévitables provenant tant de la nouvelle arres=
tation de Clémard que des derniers événements survems en. Haiti depuis le .
20 mai écoulé. Je t'envoie, pour preuve, copie d'une lettre d'un de ces
grands anis, Mr. Howard Burris de Washington, D.C. Je te demande de garder
cette lettre strictement confidenticlle car je n'aurais pas aimé que le nom
de Mr. Burris soit mentionné & quiconque en Haiti. Si cela orrivalt, nous .

pourrions perdre un trés bon ami.

|

|

i
i
Pe
‘

préctde.

& quot tren tenir, |

genre qui Gomporte trop de risques, |

wr!

” Concernant maintenant le erend bonauler nolt dont stat e “notentine. . dive | ne!
Clémard que je croyais pouvoir nous alder, celuij-ci a eu Ame faire.comprendre =
q@i'il ne pouvait an l'occurrence intérésser son - -Anetitution A une affaire de oe «

secre

a

Pour ton information, je te airai que Mr. Burris est un: colonel retreité au

Corps de Génie de l'armée américaine, ami personnel et conseiller du Président
Johnson et extrimement influent & Washington tant dans le monde politique que -
_finencier. J'ai eu & faire deux voyages & Washington entre le 8 et 11 mai om
cours desquels lui et moi envisagions ies moyens d'aider Clémard selon le “modus”
envisacgé. La copie de sa lettre du 7 juin en cours saura te conrirmer ce qi \ -

. J'ai aussi vu personnellement et lui af causé maintes fois au.téléphone, . = |

Q Joseph Dryer, qui devait se rendre en Haiti le 24 mai pour te vois mais qmiia- ~

@f‘renvoyer son voyage aprés les ozuvelles de la dernitre tentative d'invasion.

Je lui ai encore causé récemment au téléphone et 12 a eu & me faire part des fy
résultats négatifs de ses efforts, toujours en fonetion des memes circonstances, :

le lettres adressées aux autres ents de 1'étranger, dont Dabinovick, par example,” :
sont restées jusqu'ici sens réponses. Je vais une nouvelle fois écrire longue-
ment & Dabinovick pour lui transmettre ta dernitre commnication avec l'espoir
- @avoir un mot encourageant de lui. -

(Come tu dole le comprendre, na chtre Sophie, nos efforts, ‘algré toute notre

Donne volonté, ne sauraient se concrétiser & brave échéance, cur les valeura en _
qestion mii nous faut trouver ne sont pas insignifiantes. Je te aty ‘gnalerai en -
passant un'point qui a été soulevé au cours des négociations'et qui. fait ressortir .
que méme si nos amin seraient en mesure d'avancer A Clémard les valeurs nécesoaires;
fs ont des doutes séricux non pas. sur la sincérité de. Clémard & faire face eux .

. Obligations qui devront étre contract4es, mais b la possibilité” ‘matérielle de ra=
patrier, en dollars américains, les valeurs avancées. J'ai personnellement assisté
& des contacts avec des banquiers d'ici qui affirment-qu'avant longtemps, Haiti ©.
niaura presquesplus de deviscs-dollars pour solder ses comptes & l'étrenger. Autant

Gtobatacles que Je suis madheurcuscnent obites de te etenaler | pour me tu saches .

De aw abt6 mama. ay | 8 done Pas grand sepotr



--- Page 46 ---
14-0000

or

:
{
{
::
j
i
ot
'
\

Page 5

Ceci dit, malgré tous ces obstacles qui senbleraient, tnsurnuntables, jentaa - ?

pas totalement perdu l'espoir de pouvoir tfaider A sortir Clémard,-sainet =~ = | *
seuf, de la prison of sa santé se détériore rapidement, Je le sais. Liessentiel. a :
est que le Chef lui-méme soit pereuadé que l'inhabilité que nous éprouvons A t-

satisfaire les exigences du monent, ne sont en aucune facon imputabdles A Clémard.
mais plutodt. a des eirconstances totalement indépendantes de notre volonté, -

Je prie Dieu Tout-puissant pour que l'on finisse per. réaliser qe Clémard, en
bon patriote haftien, a eu fot en son pays et n'a pas cru'bon d'expatrier, comme

plus d'un lta Fatt le fruit de ses durs labeurs et ae son, m, intelligence Pro-
ductive. \

Je me proposais avéertre ‘personneliencnt a Son ExeeLlence. le ‘Préatdent a& Vie
a'Haiti, pour implorer sa clémence et sa générosité pour un emt qui nous est cher, ~
Je me suis alors demandé ei c'était 1A un geste eage qui pourrait avoir la. vertu,

* de ltépargnér et, dans le doute, j'ai préférer mtabetentr.

Pour revenir maintenant aux possibilités | de féaliser. au notns’ partiellement, la
valeur exigée, je dois te dire que je suis heureux de savoir que tu détiens une
procuration générale en bonne et due forme t'habdilitant &. ratifier tout ce que
hous pourrions entreprendre & cette fin. : .
Séparénent, par cette méme vole, je te commniquerai toutes les formalités a
-Templir pour nous mettre en mesure de réeliser dans un délaf raisonable au moins
le tiers de la somne réclamée. Il serait souhaitable que tu: sois mise en mesure
de venir ici & New York, co qui raciliterait beaucoup'les chores, mais dans 1'ime
possibilité d'une pareille alternative, tu. devras “done ‘agréex aux conditions ..
stipulées. Il faudra done «gir avec aintigence pour nous p ReEmettre dtaller eu
plus vite. — :
MO,
Ma chdre Sophie, je termineral: cette lettre: o 48s longue et ardue en te renou="
velent mon dévouement le‘ plus entier & la cause de notre ami Clénard et en te:
prient une nouvelle fois de ne jamais douter de mes sentinents progres et ceux
de ma fenille pour ‘Clémard, | tol et les tiens.: - - _

Affections & Gros-tiiche, Marie-Claudine, Toto, Eadie! et.sa a femme.


--- Page 47 ---
14-0000

e
ad

4
os
£
4
i
4
z
i
t
i
4
}

, QUITE 101, 8.C.4, fun ne
& STREET. Nw

i
,
'
f
ene 6 eeren:
soe ee eee Laneenee nent
te ee

WAS4INGTON.O.6. 20006 i-
. . oo H
. . . ot , oe, t
oy, + dune 7, 1968 ; .
an . , '
" Mr. Louis A. Brun .
RO Femme gee ” Carn. .
“254 Patch avenue : oO -
New York, New York 10011 .
Dear.Mr.. Brun. | * a
‘I apologize for the delay in responding to your |
; Suggestion concerning the commercial bank in Haiti. —

to me

My activities here have been such that I have been
' unable. until the past day or so to give your pro-
posal adequate. thought and consideration,

—_

ae

drst I must admit that the recent abortive invasion
attempt caused certain reflection and it. is this.

kind of activity, successful or unsuccessful, that
sould ere oc ser‘ sus dislocations ‘for those. established.
in business. i:.wever I must assure you that this was |
only a reflection and the reason that I willbe unable.
te accep: your offer is the extent and nature of ‘my
activities here in Washington. -I believe T. alluded _

to some of thum during vour visit. The occasions. when
‘I would find it possibl: to viait Port-au-Prince. or to
@eve’ anv sicnifinant amount of time\to the bank's :
actw@itics neru would-be rare indeed. ‘L shall.coniess.. -
to you that I declined a similar position on, a bank: .
board here in the states for the. sama reason, ~

. ~ an . . ea 4
‘f regret that this decision is neceagsary but I hope
‘that ir future relationships we may be able to do.

something useful and succesful in. Haiti..



--- Page 48 ---
14-0000

SECRET

“le 14 juin 1968

a

Sea vtepye entrees * “
encores an encrnrmncmnven rant es

FCRMALITES A REMFLIR FAR SOFMIE:

1) Envoyer, signe par Sophie, un mandat original notarie et
legzlise par le Consul Americain, a une personne anie ou
parent habitant New York, donnant a cette personne les

Renes pouvoirs donnes par Clemard a Sophie. Ce mandat ~- - 7 ,
‘ ; ‘

evra etre accompagne d'une copie authentifiee de celui ; .
. ee: . . >

de Clemard a Sophie. Se, * . vs . .

2) Envoyer les clefs des deux "safe deposit. box" qui se
trouvent a la First National City Bank avec les formes
: ‘ attacheed qui. doivent aussi etre legalisees par le consul
‘ ‘americain, — BS oS ee .
a>) Indiquer le nom et la fonction de la personne, autorisee
par le gouvernement haition a ‘regler la transaction avec .

we - Clemard pour ‘communication eventuelle relative ala trans
, saction.

- Seecuseccesce

Ma chere Sophie: .

Cette communication te parviendra par une vote
@ ev a miindiquer et que je crois etre sure.
tion a ce qu'il n'y ait pas d' indiscretion ,

Je voudrais suggerer que tu habilites Paulette selon le.
paragraphe 1 ci-dessus. .

2 .Clemard
’ Bien atten-

Ps

de t'envoie aussi. par cette meme vote. une lettre tis 4 exuce,
te renseigner sur’ dtetac dé nos demarches et Poss: bilites.

| Bacore une - fois, Bon Courage et bonjour a tous.

Tavariabl enent ’


--- Page 49 ---
14-0000

ey re a

san

“FIRST NATIONAL CITY BANK
SAPE DEPOSIT DEPARTMENT

‘AQORECS OF DEPUTY
: : _ "| HE SIGNATURE APPEARING ABOVE Ia THAT GF -

WHO HAS BEEN AUTHORIZED hid HAVE AGCGZSS TO SAFE NO—__—____in- THE
VAULTS OP YOUR BANK,



--- Page 50 ---
14-0000

_ Abb TIMES TO SURRENDER THE SAID CAFE NO.
THONITY TO REMAIN IN FORCE UNTIL WRITTEN NOTICE OF ITS REVOCATION IG-RECKIVED BY TKE RAID BANE.

eeocnemnmne HERERY AUTHORIZE:
TO WAVE ACCESS TO AND CONTROL OF THE CONTENTS OF Gare No.
$$$ 0 vaunr or FIRST WATIONAL-€1TY. BANK. care.

GEPOSIT ORPARTMENT AT. . NEW YORK, TO KEGHANGE GAIO GAP FOR
ANY NEW SAFE OR SAFES IN SAID VAULT AND FROM TIME TO TINE TO s:AKS WES CXCHAMOTE, AND 10 My

NAME AND ON MY BEHALF TO EXECUTE A LEASE OF ANY GUCH NEW GAPE OR LARS UPCes UGH THIMD AD

" WE MAY DEEM PROPER AND TO MAVE ACCESS TO AND CONTROL OF THE CONTENTS OF 4*1Y BUCH NEW GAPE

OF GAFRE, AND TO RECEIVE ALL THE LESSEE'S KEVS TO ANY SUCH NEW SAFE GR eaves, “ime PowER at
AND ANY GUCH NEW GAPE Ori SATS; THIS AUS

STATE OF

* GOUNTY OF

i vvennae yaa meena pene



--- Page 51 ---
14-0000

. ' . . . . a 7 :
> PO Seams cnet cage ens : - ; ;
‘ a

SBE

Sik ae

He etme

sii


--- Page 52 ---
14-0000

ae nti

: — : Pe 00-48) 322/ 1764-68
COUNTER; = Maits oo ik pelhiees

@NMOT Cleard Josoyh Charles Yas Gained Hetincune ote ;
Boadiine for Haieus Pajnent/Cuarles’ nolationslip vith ‘mene
. Adrten and Yvon tnint-Victor and Backwround of te heasrost/.
Prestdent Duvaller's eed ror Money Hay Fusotuly Luduce Mia to
Accept Bchene Soy kieormnized Banquo Cxsarulale ‘leith:
°. . . :

1. Recontly-released Clemmrd Joseph Charles has recotved |
tponeasnt of the dead) ino by whlon he wast pwoduce the
thousand requiced as “ransas" for rls ponent; relonses

Wee nev docdiine is late Geptaper 1960.

@. fhortly before Charles’ rearreat in vey a Rena \
-Wiaited hin at hia residence and rawnstrated vith hia.
sden, one of the directors of the Banque Nationsle do la
Wopdlique d'Hnitd (dui), told Charles that he (Charles) hod
WOR done enough sinwe his s,elease to prove the ULgudy
Gnd added that Charles was receiving too wiry visitora:. Charles

house, Charles was rearrested that save alternuon. At about the
Game tim, Yvon Haint-Victor visited. Carles and. talked to his

tn much the care vein as Adrien. Charles! reaponse to :
Qaint-Victor was abo the cane as his ansver to Adrien, daint-
Victor's wife is President Duvalior's secretary.. mo

= “""g, ince his release in June 1963, Caries hae agrest
to tovensity tte effores to ralae the US4GO) thousand and to
@enee receiving so many visitors at. his house.

&. Goarles will undoubtedly revive the echeme to raiee
he 089605 thousand through subscription by foreign investors.
toon ° Place t 4t in a reorganized Banque Commerciale d/Haitd: .
paint ector's Note: this plan ia outlined in 00-A(8) -
68. “(ranierash fvo)./ Alternatively, he my try to -
the doversnant of Haiti (GOH) in his visible cash asseto.

ant 00 OOH bonds now on deposit in banks. 2 New York City (Col. _
. lector's Note: see 00-A(S) '14367-65 ( phe: Three, -
Four end Five.) See also 00-a(8. 17056-68. . _

° Be An of the recreated Bat va, formulate fn ora



--- Page 53 ---
14-0000

|

_s BY 00-A(8) 322/1 7605 48
27 dune 1968,
DCS Case: 47,540

to get the required mz: into Haiti and at the anne tint to ensure

that it vould not slzply ve confiscated Ly the, GOH. The idea
was born because Charles and his friends relt (and still feel)
that 4¢ he siaply handed over US}605 thousand be'would then
be liquidated. Thus, the BCH schene vould serve as a cort of
dnsurence policy on Charles‘ life. On the other hand, it is
possible that the OOH would sefuse to accept the BUH scheme
ac a substitutes yor a direct payaent and would continue to

‘Qneiet on the direct payment of the Us$o05 thousand ag rensane

It 1s possible, hovever, for the’ following reaeons that hes-
ident Duvalier would consent to the DCH scheme. Piret, he is:
Gospernte for monay and does not nuch care in just what. fom

46 may enter Haiti. Second, he approsches his. provlens on a
@ny-to-day basis and does not plan tur Lito the future. . Third,
he io obsessed vith the idea of retaining power for life, Nov,
Duvaller ita perrectly vell avare, I am sure, that tha CK schene:
will not net his UE$605 thousand. On the www lmnud, however,
he fe quite anxious for foreign investors to place their money
in Haiti, both for the economic benefits which such investeents
Wil) bring to Ewidti and aleo fur the propaganda value which s.
new foreign pusinese vill bring to him. If he liquidates .
Guarles, either before or after receiving the thousand,
be will suffer nuch unfavorable publicity. It ie possible, too,

hat he may talnk that he my be able to get his hands.on the

thousand even though it amy be tied up. in the BCH:
echeme. in any event, Charles is, I believe, going to mke

‘ @he effort to induce the President to alloy the. BCH scheme —

and thereby to bring an end to the “panncm” Genacc».:

eneme  me


--- Page 54 ---
14-0000

OD ussite OT a wo ea. OO Seceeter,

ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET

BOA. Cpa
Letter Concerning Clemard Joseph Charics
Leone S. Musulin/js +t'\

OCS/Operations! + Staff.
900 Key tuilding .

“ OCs Case 47540

French froa ter
Charics, The original of this”
Jottor was sent to kobert C.
Felder, Unitod States Eabassy,—
Port-suePriace, Haiti, via State.
Deportment channels, for -
transmittal to Hae, Charles.



--- Page 55 ---
14-0000

BAR ih gtase wn Bae OE EI Dente ae oes sete RE AM GM a a dee

QOSTU LR og eames ato,

gH a. EL :
L5e FLL Avo, : at
Lew Yosz, t.¥. to (Ff jain 1968.

tee Clésant Jaseya Charles’ 5 _ ;
fort-<.-JTinca . mo
Uaits , .

Ha chire Coyne,

Cotte lottra vat pur tlaccuser récoption dca tiennes des: 1 “et 26 eat

Cawits ot Gu & juin cu couse. , ,

* 68 tu nfas pas cu Ga res nouvelles éopata ncn aCpart atuatts le eat dernier, -
Oteat que prcallre want, Jo uo weojssals ca scturasse vols ClGsnl la comaine
sulveria. La vwoyero o G2 Ctre dlricsd ) torsqia J'ot cu qio ClC.anl avait, b°
nouveau, 663 arrdtd lu dL cas, Stal clas cu d faire un cdblo a un-eal pour

Jud siucnocr won arrdvicyat. Jo culo clr qu'il a dl t'en inforucr. 4

Quoltacrent, l'arrcatation de Clésant einai que les nouvelics cor, ‘dornters \ :
- SvEnesenta ca Natts ca cu des offuts nésatif’e cur lea négcclaticas en cours
@ie Jtuvalo entancos pour clésant ct gal ecablaicnt vouloly cloutiz. Jo otal ©
‘pas bosola dy ty dirs coabien Jica al Cbd Louleversd. Alors quo nos exis
@'8o% G6 HOt pensions pouvolr abicr Cléaant que nous estizcns came un frtre,
@a RoUvelle arrcotation 3 venue hiss asaonzer aves une riguour, dont nous
wud resobtoua & poine. "

Avant Ataller ylue lutn, Je voto to dise qua ty no dois point douter de notre
Abvouewens pour Clédaamni. il cats, o¢ tu dole cusai lo eavoir, cie nous ne.
Gaurions Jazala marchandor notre concours & un eal pour qui nous avons b plus ie
Bronte affection o¢ pour qui ous coczea prots b consentir tous les eacrifices =
peyuonnals qe Les vdiavcnsiawes peuvent exiger. Ju ciois dovoir te dire que
"gig en dehors dHaiti, Jo oturrive & le tirer de lMinpusse cans laquelle il se ‘
twwuve, Ju douto fort, eans Suisse molestic, que qelqu'un d'autre ‘Palace z
_ptuaete B& le Mtr. . : :

“08 pitesants ante ecamins tant a New York, Washington, Niaz et ailleurs ont
 wous mantteatd un isely wdricux os lu venir en aide dans ics. diaites: ée leurs .
 poealdAlitdes cgopeutivea.: : :
}
‘Depute Bon retour d'tales Jo co auto eis ea acticn a cette tin et as. s peremilion
went we plusteure yorcennalicés da mone finsneler gai nicat ros bésité &
/ @masBeser uns grasa partie da leur toaps pstcjaux d la cocsrutication ces plans |
- geo jtad cub eavisager are Clézant en we de le tirer dfeatarras le plus i
“.- Papidenent poostitle. — : . a



--- Page 56 ---
14-0000

a 2
* Page 2

_-@uvicss$. La copio do ca lcttre ca fT Juin ca cours coura te confircer co qui

“-. & quod tren tenir.

”. Conseraant maintinent le — teamiten no: i 4 dont? & grat. en moiadtze ae dire 8
/. Resand qus ga crcyala pouvoir noua vider, coluieci a cui ne foiro

_, Bate Gad ecaperte trop G9 rieqies. ba ce edt 20 41 n'y @.dono pas grand eapotr.

Se an eaten OD ec eM get TEER ma Se

an a Ore

So aes
ten

Kes espoira co rfucaito cinsl que ceug de tous les enis contcst~a co cont *
bourtls cx effets rigativa incvitceulea provenant tant do la. cavelle arres=

'
|

| |

tatica de CiCcard quo cs3 Comlera C.Cncacnts gurvesus ¢a Enitd ecpuis le _ |
20 rat Ccould. 4

Je tieavolo, Lour yrcuve, copie dfuns Icttre d'un ds cos
627243 cals, Er. Esvind Parris ¢9 Keciuagtea, D.C. Jo te caconde ds carder
ecits lettre ctrictccont ceaiiccaticlle car jo ufcurais y23 cin3 que le no
éa Ke. Larris coit ceationns a qiiccuyie cn Haiti. 61 cola orrivait, nous
Fourricns ponire un trés ton cal. :

Four tis inforrsticn, Jo to dirat que Mr, Durris est un colcasl. rebraité du
Corps do Gcale cc l'ertie cniricains, cal personnel et ecasciller du Prfotdent
Johnson et cxtriscsent influcat & boshington tout cons le csonds politique que
financier. J'ai cu & falyo coux voywies O Vosuingica entre lo 8 ct 11 mat on -
coura dcsquele lat ot ol cavicagtons Icy moyens dtoléer Clint colon le "modus"

pricdde,

Jol excol vu personnellesent ct lui at eoucd reintca foia ew “¢A.dphone, .
Joseph Drycr, qal cuvait ca rondro €2 Maith lo O4 maf pour te vols mais quid
68 rcavoyer ccn voyeg2 enre3a 1c3 nouvelles ds la dorntira tentative d'invesion.
Ja lut af encore cousd recemment cr tilephone ct 12 a cu d ce faire part ces |
réeultats nfcatifa de ccs. ,efforts, tcujcurs en fonction dea inca circonstances.

Le lottres cireactes cux cutres exis da l'étrongor, dent ‘Dabtnoviek, per exanrle,
Bont rcotles jucqu'icd cang roponcca. Je vais uno nouvelle fols Ccrire longuo=
tiont & Dabinovics pour lui. trancnottee ta cerniixs coammnteation ¢ oven L*espoir
Qlavoir un rot cncourcgcant de lui.

Cams tu dols lo coxprenire, ca chire Cophte, nos efforts, rsigré ‘toute notre
bonne volentS, no ccuraicat co concrdtieer & brsvo échfance, car les valeurs en
questicn ¢2'41 nous. fout trouver nd 4aub pas insicdificnics. Jo te signaleral en
pescent un polut qil a C84 cowlcvd en ecure dea nicoeinticus ct qui fait ressortir
q@ie xine cl n23 cals ecraicat cn cscure d'avanccr A Clé=ard lea valeurs nécessaires, ©
$29 ont dca dcutcs ecricux noa 723 ty da eincCritd de ClGanl d faire face eux
Odligaticns qil Covrcat Giza contrecties, mais Od lo posoibllits catériclle de ra-
Roemer ca Gollors extricains, les valeurs avoneécs. J'ai porsonnollescnt eceiaté
@es contacts evce Cos bonqaicra dtich qui eifiment’t qa'ovant longtemps, Haiti
Bieura Presque plus co éavicsaecollara pour colder ccs ccuptes Oo l'étranger. Aatant
Atobstecles G29 jo culs ralhaireiseneat bl obligs de to sigzaler pour que tu ‘soches:

conprendre =”
Gated no pouvelt ca ltcccurreneos intéveaser ecn institution O uno effaire de ce |


--- Page 57 ---
14-0000

PRS Fore ac as AUT ATMO ENE Ha I ML Ae Cmca tered

_ | 5

morte ‘

Tes 5

*

Fos tetaleceat porca ltespoir c3 pouvoir tletes2 a corti Cldzani, cain et
exif, ¢3 1a pricca C2 ca contd co Clitricra roziccucnt, Js lo cats. Liessentiel

— @38 E23 Ge Ciuc? lutect=s colt persuctd quo Linuavllits quo nous Cprouvens A :
eaticfaire 1c3 cxigsnccs cu ecusat, m9 ecat ca cucuns fogca iczutablea b Cléman “4
rats plutot a cca circcastanccs totalencnt indtpendantcs ca notre volenté.

; : ; ut
- Cook dit, caters tera 'ces otstecles qui eccbicraleat inscuzcentables, jo n'ai i :
i

Je prie Dicu Tcut-puiscent pour quo l'on finisco par rcaliccr que Clémard, en |
bea patrioto haiticn, a ca fol cn cca pay ct n'a p23 caw bun d'expatrier, coane wed
Plus dua l'a fait, le fruit de ec3 curs lovcurs ct de con | Anteligence pro=. *
cictive. ; | t
Je'cea proposais d'¢crire: ‘porconnsliencnt 3 Son Excellence de Tréaident & Vie. : |
QEaiti, rour inoplorer ca clCzcnca cb ca efnirosits pour un cal qui nous est cher. .
rbd gs cGiis alors c€c=2n24. 1 c'étalt 1A un costo eos qui pourratt avoir la vertu ; |

@a itézargner ot, don3 lo deuto, Jjtat préferce ntabatealy.

Pour revenir naintensnt cus possibilités do falicor oa moins yarticlienent, le.
waleur exigte, Jo cola ta dire qic jo culs hcurcux de cavoly qic tu détiens une:
procuratica genérale cn borne ct duo forme t'habilitont a ratifior tout ce me
mous pourrions entreprenire a cotte fin.

Sfpart=cnt, par cotte mine vole, jo te camuniqueral toutes les fornelitéa a.
reliy pour nous nsttco cn mosure do rfalicer dons un délai raiconable au moins
Ye. ticrs de la same récleafe. I ccrait couhaitable qic tu coig mise cn mesure -
Ge wenir tei O New York, co qui fuciliterait. besucoup lea chocas,. mais dans l'ime .~
‘ Possidslitd d'une raraille alternative, tu covras done agrécr cux conditions
, Stimaldcs, I faudra done agir avec diligence pour nous pemottre: G@teller au,
Plus vite. ’

Me ehire Sophie, Jo terminerat cette lettre a4JA longue et ondue en te renou
welent ron dévouczent le plug enticr & la cause do nota cal. Clézand et en te
prinat unc nouvelle fols de no janais doutecr de nica. ecatinents propres et coux
@e xa fanille pour Clear, tol ot les §icns.

me oe

:

eemetn

| Aftections & Gros-liche, ¥arie-Claudine, Toto, Eddie-et en fome,



--- Page 58 ---
14-0000

-0 . _ . ron * +:
(1 UNcLAssiFiED CNN, oO comnpaneaS PC] SECRET

. ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET
SUBRCT. Opmenen
' Clemard Joseph Charles /batx Concerniag bozo Dabinovic Dab is

meee S. Musulin/js *N%-

OCS/Operational Support Stsff
900 Key Building

Attached for your iaforuation is
| copy of O0-a(8). 322/17050-08,

Plea. ble rm)

IWTERN A, ©

GLO “Lae” () secaer a Conrincariat (1). cin

aol 7357089 Zi
ya



--- Page 59 ---
14-0000

AAA 27M 44
; : H-00. a(s)- wal T 68
'ORRTRY: intts : 19 June 1963 -

QBNCT: Clen-d Josejn GQurice sree. | BCS Caco: 81,580 .
During Braored fecout Vere . 2 .

in Furt Dumnens Filoon/eimries Hust, produce. Bupplezent tos. Le .

Henson Moowy/Cunries Is Living Under atg- 00-A(B) 322/768 7S ; ‘

orous Prison Cooditions/Dnta Cunceraing ees i ot

Boso Dnbinwie Dillias, Wied Friend of - ‘ ce a

Charles vo

poe anc kaemne ee eae

i. During the book of 7 May 1461), the Goverauest of Batti
(G08) te reposted te lnve oasried ost rany exauutlons pany tho
poiconers beid La ¥iuit Liaanche primm. Closet Jovem Gray :180,.
Haitian benber, vos wt aoung tune executed, bosses ae Life .
wae synred on direct: urdeve fra: Prealdent Diniier.  - : \

@. Tho Oil io decanting move Lnvtatent than ever’ that, 6. cartes Pn
@ the rasa of URN) thoumnd, vith 1t ine oot ne the .

price for his -eleasw. Charles nov soeus ww feol that-if he -
doco mA mA produce the, iwney, be.will Le exocuted. During May 1963, oO
ho en vee hie vire, jindame Uophic Liwstooun Carles, a .gencral j

yer f attorney. Tils pwer uf attomoy eAvua to Yeo Charles
the right to function as her husband's alfe~ suse en sel oF
otherwise dlapose of,any or all of his suscts. .

. 3. Charles Pst has the U8#100 thousand in. cosh tn, Hew
York City Lanks [Collector's Hotes Lee reference, pe
Your. Hite holdings in Qu bonds tutal UII00 thousend /CaL- a
’ Yector's Hote: gee reverence, Paragraph Tvo/. These bonds are
by the Intoinationnl Monetary Puud (IM?). Mae Gries
4s now endeavoring to collect the US$100 thousand.cusli and to
ee collatesal the US##00 thoueend in Gul bonds; th the
_ ope that ths Gol vill accept cs jayueut of the 059605 thousand
Fanson vhntever she 19 sble to realise fros the honda plus ‘the towl
ef the cash. She Acres to lace ‘this sua in the. reorganized’ . :
Banaue Commercial pitt Boil) { Collector's Motes. Sea ref-
erence, Farugraps TBvo/ ond hopes that the Gui vill accept that -
es the paymsut cc ‘the sanoon.

& ‘sie st Deng tet wl tn Prt Dame



--- Page 60 ---
14-00000

E00 Af8) S20/2 7056 6D
Ww wie
4 $7,580

Sanless sei tyeT ee

as be bed beca berare his: ‘yeleace ta late Api) lad. ‘i Port Diesen |.
Bubboritles nav refuse ty ecoos® Nedd and etree pareels vant w :
Garles fra. tuo uutetes. |i cunscqusnao, Lo t6 +6124. Vans Lies theo

clothes ta which is wo ica ested 13 ny tad) aud 16 epyelled to

subsist eulely oa tio iagular pripan aamig. Ds tag hie peviow ine.
careeiation he was nw. uttod to cwwolve fod oud chaning: ideal the

outeias and lived ue ho lndly.

S$. the foltoving, tndividund te © godt crtond of easien.

\
Me: Usiekw «\ bone = ol ature Madtawvid irr

Augen fGupeva, wv ites: : a
Reliector's ster * oarve Qid not sulisitees Dabiuas's poetel address;

We 414 not judge 10 ‘nultable to press bis sor it. bo do aut know tho 4
‘signi fteance of the nudes listed ablove. va coupled the abuve_uane ed :
@Adees frou as euvelupe addivesed by Kao Cuarlus to Dabiumr.J Debi - i a
mar te 6 Ovies oltieen vho ume a fleet of caso olde,” Uotil about 4
396), oF 1968 he ind a cortsect vith the Gull, water the provisions of a

be cailed hic ships umer the Haitian flag, Tie Gd ultimtaly .

‘nnselea ths aontract, because, & undorstant, Inbimr Miled to my
the royaltion called for under the tens of the contact. Dabiaar {

‘$n oppoced to President Duvalier, buonuse the latter. canceled the
- @ontract ust divcusced, Lut te lor was) interocted tn. developing

prajecte (no additions) data available) in Initi. The Letter: which,
: Bre Giarles has just addressed to Unbimar contains on urgent: eppea)
_ for Financial. scotstance.

er ae



--- Page 61 ---
14-00000

CENTRAL NEisGiteCE AGENCY! : ‘ _ :
Teo metere! tana mivcaaton eating me Means Letorae of the Ueted Stairs wets the meaneng ul the f.monege Leos Yea
USC Seca 203 ond 754 te reremanen oF cevestae cf wt © aoe Mascer oon mesOred penton a prisuoeed by lew.

Dimsche/Metus of Clenrd Joousn Geries “MNS ore cine: 81,900

DATE OF 890309 ga

ACER DAILACQ 2s coofPm GB.
Fe ee PHS IS, UNEVALUATEO INFORMATION - _

| souace

Rataraliaed US citizen of Maitian birth, official .
G@xpost enterpries. Loures ankes occasiom) trips to :
tne enny contacts caung Haitian business and political y.
doth in the US and in nits. | ; t
° _ :
3. The Government of titi (Com) bas tesucd clains that the
invedere of 20 thy GU have been viped cut end that total victory
4 @gainet than. tas boon achieved. A cpoctal Thankegiving mes
wae colebrated recently in Port-au-Prince. to camenorate and
Celowete the event. Un the surface, things are politically
&. Tho reuittce csoa, hovever, ‘to differ to a unrked dexree fron
the foregoing, Although the populace has reminod quist, it
does not beliovo the Gul clains of tote) victory. In point of
fact, the invaders have not been wiped out and they have sus-
° eecded in gaining of control of ths.amll tom of Quartier Morin
end of the Citodelie Laferriere (both situnted near Cap Maition).
The GO has decided not to begin military operations: agiines
‘Gam, dus to adopt.a defensive attitule and wait and see, vind
. Raypena. The COX realises that to dislotcs the rebels.fron the
ehtatel, er

(oo CSeaprearess

The dittemnation of this document Ip timiied io civdian employeay and active’: duty

+ of the USIE member agencies, and to those senior alliciels of the agencies who mut ee? spon’
J acserdence with paragraph 6 of DCID 1J7, 1) may be related to Hiow compononis of the ‘daper
paitcrpeling un the production of N, frtelligenco. IT SHALL NOT BE O/SSCMINATED. TO: CON!
hone oF petronnel, including censullant, under-@ suntrastual relationship to the U. 8. Gor

CONTROLLED Orisa Li LS OMPEDERTIAL "NO O1Sim ABROAD |
comets aes : : BOR NO” 00m. 593 AEg0p 63 |
SAECT Imedere Have Ortesd Ortnct toutes CAE SME “ :
‘Marta had Citadelle up ats
Of Maiti Ins Adoyted Defensive Attituds/ “eh ”.

Kuen


--- Page 62 ---
14-0000

i

i

sda

a

8

rE

F

4

i

i

—_

i
A

i il

{2
i

i

|

i
il

4 a |



--- Page 63 ---
14-00000

CO uncussiten wma =~ *- sO) ce Senta, «= secre

SUBJECT: (Optonot ;
Washingtonian Howard L. Burris

yt

Dcs/Operat ional Support visff

COMMENTS (Humber eoch comment fo show from whom
te whom, Drow @ line cere column cher sock comment)

(357089

UNCLASSIFIED


--- Page 64 ---
14-0000

ee > ghpvibew AL ~ Uf?
Dee yes? >:

MIGROFILMED : : 27 rey OF
THN 2G 1968 WAS ~267-68

Director, Domestic Contact Servif ' 21 May 1968:
Attn: Operaticnal Support Staff | COC. MICRO. SER: -_
Caief, Washington Field Office ea

+ 0 Weshtngtonien Howard i Darria Dogund to Accept Chatmenshin ot
Camercial Bank of Haiti

Bs opectaliy WAS-602-61, Sated 5 Sayterber 1967) Wok alae WASATET-8)
dated 21 December 1907.

Contact Spectalist
“ pa may 1968 recotved 0 telephone commetention
1725 K Street, E nN See pion D.C., @ wealthy Tezas ol] fen:

et
Joimeca circles. The US citizen of Haitian origin xentioned below
fe the same es thet referred to in the earlier musorendm. wider:
° tMtane e between bis howe in.

epeertumed Burris to. buy 50 te gi-percent a
“nemtaal fee, probably US$1.00 and other considerations” --
ths Saatsuanahtp. Burris is mt interested - :

|

8 a
“tt em



--- Page 65 ---
14-0000

ne TEMA EELS Tce

Deere mesma 7



--- Page 66 ---
14-0000

Por eveke compre ¢ awe ‘a  fulbiesee ta A*Boonente Haitten='
ae ih réetde Gane 2"tnutitisation dee forces de travail du pays, j'ai”
ore une Tnetitution Aynaaique qu'eet la angus Commerciale -d’Haiti,
ae Génsratrice de nouveaux standards éocnamiques ot. qui. doit engendrer -
Rintégretion.de la persconelité B partir d'une massification radiase:
mu j Bese of qui bien azeisilés enpeit w Prajeter les approches de dive-
‘Joppenent ealtere-coctal” a vat diarriver Su Abplaccaent boonsmiqea

ROUND +; anion Se.

ee ed

ae Or Mates, bea. yen senblent devote péndtader otent co aut, ae”

; a a
‘ie pttanty ont ais wate aa edteation At2dgate os sate:

"encaie’ eit’ ay Sp. pretite de ln visite de'notre sul comm Louie Ae!
: Se ee en Te Set ee

, ien'petaios 0 et te vous reaettre om cate. Broprea-ane love. edroo~
; 1 ote. Bb \'geaszaite. Eiders R. SRPERBT of 69 tromyo axpriner acd vom

Votnetrag, pour oon tetqate tinh fesen do Peretry aos! : ae
‘epi mac de a eebihetl :



--- Page 67 ---
14-0000

a

Slow ts ss Mh eet Aiffloiie en vérits, de “brectnor cotte propention
a ‘Ye polts Feue tapegouse, A Ia. politique verteuse A ltinfra-rolitique |

. _nbfaate sour 2e- vobtozeny 6t encore Blue péfeste pour Je Ration Waities-
nes . .

te ‘Copendant as vageatté a. weeondre leo , probiiece de 1 bew- .
te ot L*iazeot constructif et éwulutif engendrs par le B.C.H., wont
perele de faire S00le et cette sovvelle Q6nération poltoo-Sroncatque

“gud partage avwo wot lee respopeabilitss gue posent co rencuveau de

: Ja Nation. Dee Rissionnsires do le Régéneration Faticnnle, des Wie-
@ionnaires “dunt la valeur ot l'efficacité mettent en jou des, bompee
-oonvainous .uf trevaillent B disolpliner I*Bcomals er vuv d*un opteo ~ 2
C1f Blen Aéfinis doe hosaes Qui rejettent wyotdent! uesent toute Lie
Gow fatalstée Sconcmiquee", mutation de la consotence scolale’, Volo

ae 30 0 quttngeon aatay, Srlogahe etal pour 08 om fevear do sotre pow

Cette cadale ye aie l*attriduer &- 2 osurre ta Deattan. ' 1
‘u fot en oom Destin reprise Vinal pute saledive te Doeprit et ae :
if
a
'

F covern. ROWARD L Boars
Eases | PrSoqe” °



--- Page 68 ---
14-0000

° . ooogte

peas

oO UNCLASSIFIED cre OD) co*Spenriat C) SEcret
7 ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET

: SUBIECT, {Opnenaly 7

, Clemari Joseph Charles

_ csMusulinfon 43%) -

4 DCS/Operational Support staff
900 Key Bldg.

COMMENTS (Munber:cech comment 00 shew trem whom wee

ttached. copy of Oo =A 8). 322/2N36T-
VP 58 and NYOR (TWX) 9691

furnished for your tafermation
Ee and possible, interest.
95, . .

Reve is Recoqwinca dy’ |
Toserh as Sear. Seauing
Awo aw entmy on The .
Evadirren, Mighhy detiten tbe
-4& Bosch masa avy Ff

The Tatemeore aren hoe d

TO him, These wae we |: ~

wees Pen Tasers | ad aan

alan €¢. -
Pina aor moor, The jessie,

“seein


--- Page 69 ---
14-0000

anata eee te eae
-

te |

SECRET OLISAAZ MAY GR CITE CONTACTS/NEV YORK 9891.
CONTACTS/vaSMINATON SS
OPERATIONAL SUPPORT STAFF CANUSULIND FROW SMHITOMELL
SUBJECTs CASE 47,540

"OM 9 SAY 1988, LOUIS A. AMIN TOLD UB. THAT. Leann’ JORTPH aw
CHARLES 18 StEKING WELP IN’ patsina THE REQUIRED vataes one ‘Ranson row +
TWO PRINCIPAL SOURCES, ONE SOURCE 19 BUN NINSELP, TOORTWER vite =|
SOMERODY WANED ALBERT (WO ADDITIONAL DATA AVATLASLED, IW NEW YORK
CITY, AS ALREADY. REPORTED, THIS GROUP MAS FAILED TO RAISE THE

| WONEY, QUT KAS WOT YET BEEN AALE TO COMMUNTCATE THI8 “MELANCHOLY
INTELLIGENCE TO CHARLES. THE SECOND aROUP IS. conncereD WITH A
"WAM WANED JOSTPM ORYER, MME, CHARLES WROTE 70 ANRUN CLETTER

_ WECEIVED ON 26 WAY 1966), TOLD NIW THAT HR. Dever WAS INVOLVED:
"om te MOWEY-RAISING EFFORT AND MADE A CRYPTIC NErreENcE, 70 THE

GARNER BANK IW MIANT, FLORIDA. © ARUN, WHO KNOWS: DRYER, STATED THAT MZ
WAS QUERTED DRYER. ASOUT THE CARNER MANK AND THAT DRYER TOLD WIM THAT HE
“| MAD NEVER EVEN HEARD OF IT. ARUN DESCRIBED DRYER AS-AN: EMPLOYEE OF
IME INVESTWENT FIRM GOODBODY IN MIAWT AND SAID THAT HE Hag RUSENESS
INTEVESTS. TH HATE AND THE WETMERLANDS, AMONG GTHER PLACES, ARUN
D DRYER ARE MEETING DURING THE EVENING OF 20'NAY 1968) AFTER

piece emp eer tt


--- Page 70 ---
14-0000

"PAGE! 2 CONTACTS/NEV YoRK 9891 SECRET

WHICH BRUN VILL TAKE DRYE®? TO THE AtePoeT, Dever rs TO FLY TO

“ MAITE OR 24 WAY 1968, SRUN SAID THAT DYER IS A FRIEND OF TWE
"WARTLY OF JOSEPH P, KENNEDY, . VE SPOUMNT HP THE WANE OF S¥E,. SAINTS

VICTOR, SECRETARY TO PRESIDENT DUVALIEP, vgn VE REPORTED ag “WAVING |
REEW IN MEANT SINCE. 9 may 1968, IT Now DEVELOPS TWAT IT 1s wR, ;
GAINToVICTOR CHOT NWES) ¥HO- MAS BEEN IN MIAHY SINCE 9 “ay 1968 .

'. RAINTSVICTOR, VHO I9 OFTEN EMPLOYED. AY PRESIDENT OUVaLIER on
“CONFIDENTIAL SUSINESS. AND WHO CONTROLS THE WAITIAN PUILATELIC:

CORPORATION cwHten ISSUES MAITIAN STAMPED, WAS ACTED AS THE

“ SWTENMEO TARY BETVEEN PRESIDENT DUVALIEP AND CHARLES AND WES:
“WIPE, WE REPORTEDLY VISITED CHARLES WHILE id LATTEP vas IN FORT
» DEMANCHE AND DELIVERED TO. MIN THE COMMIT TONS UNDE® WICH. ME WOULD. —

‘BE ‘wer. FREE CTeE.; THE USS6EOS,G04),. Rats opin THAT THE REASON

A ror GAINTOVIZTON'S PRESENCE IN MIANT BTONT PossreLy WE TO ORTAIN

x SOME OR ALL OF THE. US86e5 008, FRON SOMEBODY. THERE, : ©
“HRV SUBJECT: BRIM ALSO KNOWS @ REPUTED MULL TINTLL IONATRE. wanep ‘Jown.
“ROLTEN. AND INTRODUCED HIM, VIA CARLE APPOINTMENTS. TO. LOUIS LEVEQUE.
- BOLTEN: 18 REPORTEDLY A- MATURALIZED us CITIZEN OF EITHER GES*AN: OR

USTRIAN “BIRTH AND 18 NOTED FOR urs PurLaNThROP Tc INTERESTS.

Pay Maite, ee



--- Page 71 ---
14-0000

+
‘
o

tee

pact 3 conracTavuty your ony SEC E t 7 nae _
HEV SURJECT] ARUN WHO KWOVS HITCHELL AB COLOMEL PITCURLL enrnieey
OF THE ARMY, SAID THAT ME I9 CONVINCED va THE erponTeo re way. \
1968 INVASION OF NAITE BY EXILES 19 THE VORM OF THE HAITIAN coal IT roM
AND OF Cla, WE TOLD US THAT HE 18 & fO0n frre AND CONTACT OF
“RAYMOND JOSEPH, MEWCRAL SECRETARY OF THE HGITIAN COALITION IW.
iw TOM AND THAT JOSEP TOLD HIM THAT: viclvatrtes COALITION BS =.
| (SPONSORED IW EVERY VAY RY THE Cla, neu. sarp THAT WHEN WE WEARD
|. AROUT THE REPORTED THVARTON ME CALLED sosttn AND ASKED’ WI". WWETHER
{> OR NOT THE REPORT was: TRUE, JOSEPH FIRST. jDEreD. TT, BUT LATER ,
TF  QaT AROUT 1130 HOURS) CALLED 9RUN BACK ANDI TOLD HIF THAT HE RAD
CHECKED YITH IS PATRONS IN WASHINGTON, THE PATRONS TOLD MI THAT
THE IWVASION STORY IS TRUE, BUT THAT THE FNVASTON WAS LAUNCHED NOT
‘PROM CIMA, BUT FRON “SOME OTHER PLACE". GRU TOLD US THAT JOSEPH
‘DID NOT IDENTIFY THE “OTHER PLACE". BASIYG NIS BELIEF UPON
SOSEPH'S BEHAVIOR AND ANSWERS, BRIN IS CONVINCED THAT THE: ~
INVASION WAS BEEN ORGANIZED BY CTA. LOCAL. ere REPORT
"MAT A Rene PLANE DROPPED EIT ;
FRINGES ONE FELL NEAR THE |
“AIRPORT eNO INFORMATION cowctrntns THE OTHER wo, 5 sat. ONLY ONE



--- Page 72 ---
14-0000 |

i

PAOE 4 CONTACTS/NEV YORK 9891 SECRET a ee

EXPLODED, WO CASUALTIES WERE SUFFEREH BY THE MAITTANS, JOSEPH.

“ QRLLED THE HATTIAW CONSULATE AND Yas foun THAT THERE MAD BEEN
AM INVASION AND THAT THE GOVERNWENT NS THINGS FIOWLY UNDER

“HD ARRIVALS TW PORT©AU- PRINCE ARE
PYLEs LOUIS A, RRUN, PRESIDENT
BSB INTERNATIONAL CORPORATION

2 te

pe

WEY YORK, WEV YORK



--- Page 73 ---
14-0000

CENTRAL INTELLaGENCE AGENCY -

is
This material contasns information allecting the National etene of we Unaed Scates enhen te meaneng of the Exmoruege Lows, Tale A
w. usc Secs. 793 and 794, the transmisson oF teveieinn of atch m any manner to on weasmorsied perce 9 promoced by low {

i rs 7
CONTROLLED DISSEM CONFIDENTIAL _ NO © messin Agnone

country Halt’. . “REPORT TNO Por

00 shar 60
SCT Rearrest of Claman’ Joseph cuariee/Cuaries bart pista 2 +
Is Hot Able to Raise US$605 Thousand Raneaa/Datea ; , © 6 itAr BB ’
Concerning Charles’ US Bank Accounts/Preeident “° PAGES 9 ; cae

Bank of the Republic of Haiti And Claine en. 7, Sh
_ pAaaitional ery te Thousand. ; eUPADOR Tor BSE 0-68

PLACE & DATE ACQ. _Por$-au-Prince, Maiti, 4- ae (Sarngragh .
.* THIS Is 1s cra “a6 = a one ov)

Li aoe ee nea

SOURCE Source amintains close contacts vith Haitians in the US anf vith

prominent business end political figures in Unit, and travels
et irregular intervals to ‘Whe Caribbean: countries.

“ke cima Jom Sass aa marortat ot 1660 hours 11 my 62
Eis present whereabouts are not known to mo. ‘

2. ‘Te became clear, ging the rer ivan 3 ty 68 ant 6 ey 62 \

ings in Batti (essentie. ofle and various other business énter-
wises, buildinga and F=itian government bonds) falled to
the negntive opinions. of. those approached as possible
3. Gmrles holds. recet; im the: : Matiounle de la Pepub-
@'Eniti (BURE) in the amount of US$300 thousand dated
1996, snd claims fraa personal credit of

weilize these suxs or RSA eredis fer tommy to ‘off the
Wal605 thousand ranson. aay:

bh. Gmaries’ current visible cams assets. pont: of 'is$100 > owned,
deposited in ‘the Manufacturers Hanover frust Compauy and. the
Firet Hational City Bank, both of New, York City.’ Ho.

Bed OB41I0 thousand in theew two bank.-; Vas

wt dusemunation of thus document is hmited to oi arse

0} the USH mambor agencies, end to those senior officiate af the tn
* Ww accordance with paragraph ve of ‘OCD 17, 0, may be releared: hi inet
 Rathepating. in tho praducton of tHahenal lntelligence. IT SHALL Nedt ae
hens @F personnel, including consultants, under a contractual relay he

ntalngance
r 3 speciicatly cantrolled
Of tho daparimunty and 4 :°$ Government duecily
to 1 CONTRACIONS” shall: no be diteminated to orgeniza-
amen! without the weitten parmnon of the onvgnater. 1



--- Page 74 ---
14-0000

CONTROLLED DISSEM © conrinantzar NO DISSEM ABROAD ‘

IGE 2 Jie
00-B-322/14367

fiaprisonea in 1967, the Eaitian authorities (no additional data

evallable) compelled him to signa mmber of olank checks of

these two banks. The authorities thea caabed a check for

USQ10 thounand, vbich the bank honored. ‘hen the Haitian —
euthorities next meecnted filled-in checxs, hovever, the bank.

refused paynent, beceune it knew of his arrest and refused to : ’
Dalieve that he had signed a cheek after his arrest. ‘The | - oo

5. Tt to possible that President Dralicr wight settle with Curles '
-y Cor the U3$100 thousand on deposit in Tork, voen, es-end noo

af be finally realisce tit Canries is not able to reise orig-
imal US2605 thousand cendicd. On the other band, it is entirely ,
possible tit bas other funds secretly deposited outsides

way tharefore havo utilized the opportunity to deposit some of
his om monsy outside of Haiti. . . , -
6. 2 Gmriles 614 in fact deposit money cf his om in Britserland
- Ov some othar locality outside of Kaiti, President Duvalier my .
mov or cuspect thet he has dono eo. lis dofinitely does imow i

|
j
|

-  @uarlee' 1) My 65 rearrect my be the preliminary to renewed
pressure to inducs Chorles to part with his Now York money .



--- Page 75 ---
14-00000

FE) QINCLASSIFIED = (7) # “SERNA, : Ci conr~entia =) “SECRET

. ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET
SERECT. Oona

Clemard Joseph Chas les

George S. Musulin/js 55m
DCS/Operational Suppoft Staff
900 Key uilding

"> "DCs case 47540 :
“™ 21 May 1968

Attached, for your information, —
is copy of New York (TwX) 9881).

© 20/-35# 027,

Dace

Taina
O seen

ies ye

Sho

~~ “UNCLASSIFIED

preity

sSlatatnss

{ees Cra

i
4
t


--- Page 76 ---
14-0000

Buen

cowr q pts t TAL 209aaer may 68 crTe CONTACTS/NEV Yorn saet

CONTACTS/ WASHINGTON
OPERATIONAL SUPPORT STAFF comusuLTM FROM JHNETCHELL

SUBJECTS CASE 47,540 CCLEMARD JOSEPH CHARLES)/ PRESIDENT DUVALIER®S: _ aay
° SECRETARY TN WTAMI/GUERRILLA LANDING INHAITE ©
FOR WHAT IT IS WORTH, CLEWARD JOSEPH CHARLES uses “THE
: PSEUDONYR JAcORY IN HIS CONFIDENTIAL CORRESPONDENCE AND ALLOTS. THE .

. PSEUDONYY “MEAD” 70 LOUIS LEVEOUE. | o

ee susstete THE 2@ MAY 1968 ISSUE OF erne WE YORK parLy neve?

: arnits ow PAGE 204 REUTERS REPORT FROM SANTO DOMINGO, DOPTWICAN
i REPUL.IC, ‘Twat ANTISQOVERNHENT GUERRILLAS FROM CUBAN HAVE, LANDED

m warty _ RROTERS QUOTES REPORTS FRow PORT= AIR PRINCE, MAITIy THAT
accoNntna "to “SOURCES CLOSE TO PRESIDENT DUVALIER,. TROOPS VERE:
SUNT OUT TO DEAL WITH THE INVADERS, SAID TO INCLUDE ARMED. HAITIAN
EXILES, A NUMBER OF CIRANG AND SORE EYPOPEAN: MERCENARIES, “THEY .
LANDED ON THE HAITIAN COAST FROM ORTENTE PROVINCE, CUBA, ;
ACCORDING TO REUTERS, PRESIDENT NIVALIER Is GAID TORE =
“DIRECTING MILITARY OPERATIONS FROM THE PRESIDENTIAL PALACE.
LOUIS Ay ARUN TOLD US ON 1S HAY 1968 THAT MADABE BAINT-VE ‘ORy.

P AWHOR HE IDENTIFIED as PRESIOENT DUVALIER’S: SECRETARY, “WAD? 'WREN 1"

oe

Petal



--- Page 77 ---
14-0000

*

p
aS
ie]
¥
&
hb
LF
x

e

‘

"
’
-

MOE © CONTACTS/NEV YORK SOeL CONFIDENTIAL
MEANT, FLORIDA, SINCE 9 MAY 1968, NE DID WOT KNOW THE PFASON FOR
VISIT, RUT SPECULATED THaT sue WIQNT AE COLLECTING INFORWATION
CONCERNING AN InvastoH, RIMORED EN HEV YORK AS. AROUT TO ag
LAUNCHED, SOME HAITIAN EXILES IN NEW YORK (NO ADDITIONAL Data
AVAILAMLED. ARE SATO TO. NAVE DEEN WISSING FRO THEIR USIIAL MAUNTS SINCE
THE FIRST VESK OF HAY 1968, VE CANNOT voucH FOR THE ACCUPACY OR

_ TRUTH OF ANY OF THE. FOREGOING BITS OF TKFORMATION CONCERNING

a Divastons AND NERELY PASS THEN ALONG TO You VOR TRANSMITTAL 70
— DOTERRSTED PARTIES, - 7 oie

PILE: Lours A. BRUK, PRESIDENT

WB INTERNATIONAL CORPORATION —

FIFTH AVENUE,

WEY YORK, HEY YORK

“@ASE 47,540.
COMPIDENTIAL

“GCL RE PILEY MOTTON MESSAGE LIME THREE SHOULD READ AS. FSLLOYS
‘$90 PIPTH AVENUE UXXK -ViCE OER ee



--- Page 78 ---
14-0000

OC.unaassivies = [ye arenea, 2) cor*sewtian secre

SUBECT. 1Opnenehy
Clenard Jcseph Charles

POeorge Se Musul inf js\—
OCS/Operationsal Support Staff

. oem noe .
900 Key Suilding ’ / . 1968. - .
’
. t Attached. for your informatica
H and possible interest is copy
: wy 7/ut _ ‘ of O0-A(S) report 322/
i _] 3 8 G00:,. Has. . 14008-68, ; 7
|
I>
i
'
‘
‘ t
4
at GTO ee C) secret =.) CONFIDENTIAL ED wa
oat awe a! L ree = : ;

i
4

4


--- Page 79 ---
14-0000

set eaiGinck AGINCY

Tres eter! conters vismeton Facieg he Nalcel) Zeteree cliche Usted Stunt evden th eeaney of the Liporeze Leet, tee
USC Seca 753 end P94 che wememance oF terewme oF aruch = ony manoes toian maanariced person © wronoed by Www.

‘ ar. ES oe ee ; : f
CONTROLLED Ursséa Ek AL, UB OT — “No SSE ABROAD |

svetct Clemurd Joowph-Charles Must Reise US 9605 0 palt ciste

Thousend Before is <on Eesume His Banking And Other arn :
dctivities/Omline Cf Charles's Plans/Presi¢ent - 99) FAGiS 2 ° : 4
Duvalicr Repostediy Hopes To Ingwrove His leage And: i .

Fo Attract Foreign Ceupital Ant Business Activity/ iitincis DOS- Cases 40,556 ent 47,580 |

Runore Cc.stime Conceraing Possible Beorgeciaat ion sewiemat t01 00-8
Of Haitian Gowers <t

DATE OF PSO bing 68

MACE A BATE “SD pavt—ma-Prince, Basse @.
or 1S unas AUD INFORMATION ~ ~

Cuarheo 10 now water house exrect. in Port-eu-Priine, ass

Charles's tmmstiate rescurese conates of shat UD #100 shousend tn

¢w0.6 banke (no edéitiona) date evailable), various bones, businesses
(coucubiel cile, an cuteznbile

* te), tasasase, A end ede ob eho . .

sea hay ‘mivay, personnel: ‘ane the: " pieligencd, componeets
est upc th the intoxmation, However, whens spmcsbcally sontrolled,

red


--- Page 80 ---
ABROAD

A COSPItawriat/cia Tepamas wes ontxNO DISSEM

to
es

to raise
tras

imo tus:
rr

Sntevested

tim yoot
ont

Ee»

to

som, ©

Le iaeY
ibe za i

Tabs eis
uid U i Ua

LLED DISSE

RO
e

NT

14-0000 —


--- Page 81 ---
14-0000

Contime
. Of Haitian Goverment — .

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

This materual contams sdormahon aflectag the Natrona! Delense of the Unded States witha thi meaning of the Espionage Laws, Title
- 18, U.S.C Secs 793 and 794, the transuminon of revelation of whech ia any manner to an unauthorized perton s prohidded by law.

f SEPA ERTL me, 7
CONTROLLED DISSEM : con Oty i. NO DJSSEM ABROAD
. a . rege “isa
COUNTRY Bait’ : : . REPORT NO OO -aagen,/1 4068-68
SUAECT Clemard Joeeph-Charles Must Raise US 9605. DAT ose. _ aes

Thousand Before Ze Can Resume His Banking And Other . :
Activities/Oukline Of Charles'o Plans/President.. NO. PAGES 2
Duvalier Hopes To Inprove His Inage And a

Repartedly . 2 : :
Go Attract Foreign Capital And Business Activity/  acrertnces DCS Cases 40,556 and Sy .n0 .
Runere 321

Concerning Possible Reorganization Supplement to: 00-B-

TE OF INFO. : i i

oa f OF INFO. say 68 _ a ;

| PLACE & DATE ACQ nous os Detnes, Baits 6B... a
: eer ee rks ae tht vAlWateD INFORMATION

SOURCE Maturalised US citisen of Haitian birth. ‘Souree maintains close contacts: .

Port-au-Prince,

3. Chevies'e tmeitate revcurces consist of about US $100 thmeand in sash in.
| pede reed (no efditienal data available), various hones, .
A@esemtial 021s, an cutcobile Gealership ani cibers (nc eifiitioml) deta eaile
eble)), buildings, lend and about US g400 thousand worth of laitios. govermmant
bonis. Be did. have amcther US $300 thousand in pervcual funds in eiti. Ho

1
t!
E
;

a 1
4% The dissemination of this document is bmitad to‘ civilian:
of the USS member aguncies, and to those senior officials of the member a m iH
ine accordance with paragraph & of DCID 1/7, t may ba toloasad to those ‘<omponents of the departments and aguiicius of the U. 5. Government dueciy
+ sem A CHAE OW’ ME CISEEMINATEDTO COM IPACTORS It shall not be disseminated to orgenie”



--- Page 82 ---
14-0000

CONTROLLED DISSEM comrmxnriat/cIA Desrou ust oxxNO DISSEM ABROAD —

HB MH 4
: dey 148 “Li ui
ca Eup Ha



--- Page 83 ---
Tqp0000

CT undassiie = CO) cone Writ = - setter,
"ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET

SUBJECT: (Optional)
Clemard Joseph Charles

: 1 TMG. orge 5S. Musulin/ 4% 7 ™ ocs Case 47540
. . - DCSAperational Suppott Staff
900 Key Building

Attached for your information
_ Is copy of New York (TWX) 9873.



--- Page 84 ---
1714-00000 +

wea 7

oe

-

esucoy 31m

CONFIDENTIAL 1619497 ay 68 CITE CONTACTS/NEW YORK 9873
CONTACTS/WASHINGTON .. a o
_ OPERAT TONAL SuPPORT STAFF canusut 1% FROM SUM ITCHELL
| SUBJECT REARREST OF CLEMARD sostri CHARLES (CASE 47,940)

7 WR. BRUN TOLD US OM 16. MAY 968. THaT On 1 MAY 1968 at. 1688 3
° yours CLEFARD JOSEPH CHARLES WAS/REARRESTED, MIS PRESENT
*, WHEREABOUTS ARE NOT KNOWH TO MR. |BRUN, HRs BRUN TOLD US THAT HE
° WRCETVED THE VORD IW A LETTER Ref EIVED DURING THE. AFTERNOON OF
“16 WAY 1968. er '
“PILED LOUTS As BRUM, PRESIDENT

. BAB INTERNATIONAL CORPORATION

“43a PIPTH avENUE |
WEY YORK, EV YORK
jeONP IDENT IAL .



--- Page 85 ---
14-0000

[

(0 ‘ONcLaSsiFiED - ith . DD cone ““utiat || SECRET
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET

SUBJECT: {Optional}
Clemard Joseph Charles”

FROM, corge s. Musulin/js44""" :
DCS/Operational Support Staff
900 Key Building

COMMENTS {Number each comment to show from whom |
te whom, Drow o lim; across eotumn ofer sack comment)

REF: Ripley(Musulin Telecon,
2 May 1968 ©

Attached 00-A{S)522/15163-€8,
_ which was sunmarized in ret

telecon is furnished for your
b> information and interest.

: tr
‘

We shall confine our reply to
Neows¥erk to advise our New York
Office to counsel source to

| gheck in with US Embassy in :
Haiti and to thoroughly debrief.
source on his return to New Yorks.

TatsH
USE OH



--- Page 86 ---
14-0000

EL RIN tt NLP OO Neh TIES LTE

Vasertye warty mM en OA

DATE SP TREN 27 APRIL 19§2%

eae CTs SLE"ATD FISEPMeCHASLES NAS BEEN TRLEASLN Fog PETA aon

og 6
see win a mwa | ba74
. PLACE AND DATE ACTUIRED: en 30 OPRIL pose a? f*
|
|
i
E

. APPYCEITLY “ust Pay PANSON OF UssErs cea

THIS 13 UY PEPORT NO, O0-acs) 1316368

SOURCE DESCRIPTIONS NATHRALIZED US CITIZEN OF VAITIAT PTATH, source

WAESTAINS CLOSE CONTACTS YITH MAITIANS IN THE NS aD WITH ee! in
WRRANINENT SNSINESS aD POLITICAL FIQUPES If MAITI AND TSAVELS at Ce '
THOLGULAR INTERVALS T] THE CARIMREAN COUNTRIES, -

. t
“1. CLEWARD JOSTPH-CUORLES wes SELZASED FPOM. PRISON ON THE a
EVENIN® OF OS APPIL 1DGR AND PROCEEDED TO HES RESIDENCE. gtm
“SOURCE TELLS UG THAT CNARLES I5 SOTH PUYSTCALL ¥ aXD roraty, ELL
“ano Brow waren PREPARATIONS T? RETINN TO vomx, .
= .

ap aeen As

POSSIPLE, NECAMSS staRLES, ‘basins To TAL, To 4T,
7 MAS RESY.COMPELLEM To ASPFE To] TAY OUT 9 LETTE oF: ,
Ge AIT TY FAVOR OF THE NATIONAL aAEy OF TE

Spee AQT OF eres amen,

-—_

PEPUMLTC OF MATT? 18
TTS LETTER 14 T ROMAIN VALID For

3a DAYS FROM THE TIME YT IS TAKEN OMT, | CHARLES. WAS PEEN. GIVEN

A SHORT TIME (NOT SPECIPIENs TO PRONNCE THE MONEY AMD THE
“LETTER AF C7EDIT, re : :

3. PADANE CHAPLES corm rtre D Hn sgnasin 1) THE rnece iP a

mnunae OF AGTION, = FALLAING MER ON RELEASE - Fann Prison, one Wag

-yrsttan SY AN UIKMOUN ETO ant SOME) PATTY, THIS THD TV IDEAL, SET

FORTY THE CONDITIONS IMpER WHICH 4AMLES MOULN RE PELEAS REDe
THE RONINIT IONS .tueT, unes THE UTR6NS or MET TANED anour, BADBYE,
MMAMLAS ACCEPTED THE CANN IT TONS AND STANED A PAPER TO THAT

EFFECT. MEM TAN ATR COMHUTTAN HTS Noe AND

seaaet



--- Page 87 ---
14-0000

te APL Loves Teg +

Vie Ta co. 18 Ta

FZ OTME sagey (Faw uwspeyes eyse

“es IT (tz sane cr PINFEeseS NOT

19 Rea RIS THE FOMEY Mow 18) BND PELIVES IT TO Ha ITY,
5. HX SOUPCE PLANS TO FLY TO POTT-AM—PPINCE GY EITHER 2
Pay 1942 98 3S May 1962 AND TO FETA TO rey’ yorx ons may 196,

q
rae E THIS SCUROMLE IS, OF CONRSE, SIPJENT 19 CHANCES DEPENDING Pox

THE LoCaTIOY OF CHANLES*s MONEY AND DEPENDING UPON WHSTHE® OR VOT-

oe

SWCE IS COMRECT I” HIS SUONTSE THaT (CHARLES wanTS WIM to ac AS
Covering,

6. SIWECE KEMVESTED US TO NOTIFY THE US EMMSSSY IN WAIT? THaT-

se pees menting gor

HE tenant be Een Rds ie ead ee

4

"UA FE MT THE COINTeY, HE wisucs THE EMMASSY TO ne NOTIFIED ,

oft

ae

S34 PSCAUTION. SOMPCE YS a MaTUSSLIZEN US CITIZEN OF MATERIA

_. PIRT. AND Dazs KOT: FEAR THAT AUYTHING UUTOYAPD. VILL YAPPEN TO at.
je WE PEELS THIS way NOT omy PECArSs OF MES US CITY SIP :
, “ha Steanae an snvkoxe THat Tr werTTAes “TU rope pen OF .
NOT SE ESRETB gon, OME Tey uaerti<, MOST aMNTOne Mat THe
‘y SION THAT ME MILL RE IN detTE, sprees fe weny Paanin oF
So SEP Ere edt ayn SUQOL THeT MP VILL 24 nOTHINS TO" .
OVUUET ae oragpeteg eon nesses ye ToamLny 4
ORT AN STOONELY TO ME TEaT *3 SOOM Ag ME ADRTvEs .
I. “ate te papige ME VISIT THE dneacey AED LET THE, PROPLE THEPS. ph.
STO Pen ME Ee ay atthe ve OLS9 TELD WT TO. TELL THE. EnAseY | my
=9et

"ES DATE OF DEPARTURE AND TO CHECK IN WITH. TRE ExPassy
ra “7TO8 TO CEPATUPE, SONRKE ATREED TO NO THIS,

my IMDERSTAND THAT XENNETY RIPLZY,
TIe PUTTRE APFAIN,

pop, Ts Alt CONANT OF |
‘PRED, PLEASE WAVE HI¥ NOTIFY THE APPSOPOLATE
Mv innate Om Hartt THAT sotmer: WILL RE THERE
*INTIONES APOVE.

D'P ENa THE TIMES

—— ne.
a ~ ane —_.



--- Page 88 ---
14-0000,

SECRET

- 2 may 1968: Doe
a ; oe vo _ pa
i SUBJECT: Clesard Joseph-Charles ~ Plans for. Payuent of
; Ranson oo .

4

Q 2. Mr. George Musulin (DCS) called today to give ,

a WH/7/waiti advance notice of a report his office bas received ft

wae relative to the release from prison of Clenard Joseph-Charles,. i

. 3. Louis BRUM, who is the business representative of. -

CHARLES in New York, has been urgently requested to cone

to Port au Prince. ‘The request camo to BRUN from one Edaond oa

VILAIRE who, BRUN acsorts, reprosents CHARLES in Baits. - .

peux plans to leave New York on 2 or 3 May and return on - \
> ee _— . oC .

3. .According to BRUM, CHARLES has agreed to pay $608,000
to the Duvalier Governzent for his release from prison, . :
BRUM clains not to know where tho money is located but sus- :

pects that it may be in Europe. He further Guspects that —
he will be caked to act aw courier, ._—-

4. ERUN, who is a naturalized U.S. citizen, has. Bons - ‘
qualms about his own safety in Port. au Prince.and:has ogksd = = ~
bas DCS contact in Hew York, Br. Mitchell, ‘that’ the Entessy

- &m Port. au: Prince: be advised of his arrival.:. Be. was told.
that he should go to the Enbassy hinselg upon arrival and
wake his position known. . : . _

5. Mr. fusulin seid he assumed: WE/7/aaiti vould pass
' the information to the State Departacnt .> . oT



--- Page 89 ---
14-0000

CLassiey To Face ma.
BREF TO FILE HO.

eue are Oacr. to Tesanen Oo
Oss. :

Otssem ov

c1yoo, rvp ifr 6, DOP, SOD 4, WH/COG 8, WH/REG 8, WH/7/H/RE 3, DO 5.

SECRET 691700 JAN 68 CITE PORT AU PRINCE 4912) >
DIRECTOR INFO. PANAMA cry, REP/LANT y- SANTO Domino, “ SUWAVE
IER ee cen
“supoata —-EVLENON'2 FROM EVLENON 14 “

FILED 8917082



--- Page 90 ---
me

GENTRAL (XTELLIGENCE AGENCY . — ° ROUTINE 4
Intelligence Information Cable ("-269% “oo =:
; PAGE 1 OF > PAGES : .
STATEANR ol NMCC/MC (SECOEF Jcs ARMY NAVY AIRD clasnuce mc NBA sco one cas ’ a .
FBI 16S. i
was i Pah rece

NO FOREIGN DISSEM/ CONTROLLED DISSEM _. _
ie Te

‘
“THIS: BM INFORMATION ® . NOT ALUATED IGEN: “
a rarer A LES

cecoLeT~—C~=~C~t~—CS = 106-68
SECRET ay2inez ile TOCHE-315/06: a
oss 9 UAWARY.19680 = E?

SO INET ONIN = ¢t

apr a , .
eer cere MTL ENE IT :
. .

COUNTRY: - HAITI
bolt " §@ DECEMBER 1967 7
SUBJECT: - - AMNESTY OF -PRISONERS --

acas _° HAITI, PORT au PRINCE. <8 UANUARY 1968) . HTP 1126
"SOURCE s A FORMER HAITIAN GOVERNNENT EMPLOYEE WHO HAS .THE
_ CONFIDENCE OF MANY MEMBERS OF THE DUVALIER
" GOVERNMENT. HIS REPORTING HAS BEEN ACCURATE
. BINCE 1963. HE RECEIVED THE INFCRNATION FRO, --
_ A HAITIAN MILITARY OFFICER WHO-18. ‘ANT 1-DUVALIER
BUT WHO HAS CONFIDENTIAL ACCESS TO KEY. MEMBERS
_ OF THE DUVALIER ENTOURAGE... HIS INFORMATION HAS
7 | PROVED ACCURATE DURING THE, SHORT . PERIOD OF HIS
roa! REPORT Ino.

nN

" PRESIDENT FRANCOTS DUVALTER RELEASED 187 PRISONERS
IN. ANEW YEARS AHWESTY. WITH THE EXCEPTION oF LUCIEN
BELIZAIRE, HINISTER OF JUSTICE IN THE. FOURTH AND ‘FIFTH :
“DUVALIER CABINETS FROM 4 NOVEMBER 1956-10 re DECEMBER 1999,
“WEsweR: APOLLON, FORMER OFFICIAL IN THE TABAC REGIE,



--- Page 91 ---
14-0000

Ne . ar |

pay

OL UNcAstFIED sa TERAAL (1 CONFIOENTIAL C7 Secret

SUBECT, (OpenQ . . . 5 5

Mme Clemard Joseph Charles Reportedly Released Prom Prison | . .
ROMs csuusulin/bm ‘26?’ wo, : . ;
- DeS/operational Support Staff : .
900 Key Bldg. : ;

For your informatica and
retention,

re (00-8-00156-68) Pg

Sv sa

bs sag a- re - — eee 4 :
Te | wR

STO sar omen OB oO oasne

eerere ngets. Hetattomam ts a oe

co



--- Page 92 ---
14-0000

REBOR

CENTRAL INIELLIGENCE AGENCY

tha sotenal contains information allectog she Nebonal-Delenae of tie Unoed Suter widea the ecaneg of the fipwnege Lar. Tie 5 Q
18, USC Secs. 793 and 794, the transmasion oF reveiscca of ebech in any manne: 10 an unevthorued period 5 promoted by law. }
_ CONTROLLEL: DISSE | GCONPIDENTIAL -| __- *O DISSEM ABROAD” f
COUNTRY Halts . _, «MPou NO. 00-B-322/00156-68 | .
_ SUBECT Mee Clemard Jose Cries Reportedly _DATE DISTR @ JAK 58 - : *
Released from Prison/Clamrd Joseph ayy paces oo .
Charles May Be Released fran Prison 2a. 7 -
. RULRENCES ng gine: 40,556 =, ‘
Cases 40, . :
— * QOB-321/36765 67 : ’
DATE OF NSO. - pate Docenber 1967 - ~ ———_, 00B-322/57063-67 :
MACE A DATEACQ sos, Late Decesber 2967. _ — j
_ TSS UNEVALUATED INFORMATION . ees

- SOURCE

-Jaturalized US citizen of Enitian birth; official of a US iaport- = a
. ; company. Source's business sctivitieu mike it necessary - St ft
for him to travel at irregular intervals to the various countries :

of the Caribbean area. During ouch trips, he. maintains exist- | -
ing business end pereonal contacts and develops nev ones. ned

-seae

ee

: on | ry | * g

. . noe i

. The distemmnation of this ds aament 16 tamied to civilisn employees and active duty mdtary pervennal within the intelligence compo o

o : of the USIB member agencies, ond to these somer elliciale ef the member agencies who mutt ect-upon the inlormetion. However, untars spucilicatly cong,”
Wn eccordence with paragraph & ‘of DID HF, 4 may be reloated to those com 10 of the departments and iay of the UY. &. Government - Oo
. parlsipaing in the production ‘of National satatigence. IT SHALL NOT GE DISSEMINATED [O CONFRACTORS, hall not be disseminated to ee
hone ef persannel, including consultants, wader @ contract tolelionship fo the U. 5, Gevernment.witheu! the writen, parminan of the arignator. hos

Lo we


--- Page 93 ---
14-0000

. ‘ ; CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

im This material contams information aflecing te National Delense of the Unted States withia'the meaning of the LeJonage Laws, Tile
. + 3B, USC Secs. 793 ond 794, the tranmanon or revelation of whech wt any earner to on wnauthorized person is promoded by lay.

og cowmouro oust __|couszopersas | ___wopisem amsoun [conpzpenriar | ____ wo ossen asnoao
* courmy Hitt ABORT NO 00 B-321/36765-67 ©

suanct Rumored Release of Cléaard Joseph Charles oate pista. 27 Des 67 : *

NO. PAGES =o °

: i

REFERENCES DCS CASE: 40556 .

: 49755 ’

DATE OF EO. December 1967 ,

. - o. 8
THIS IS UNEVALUATED NiFORMATION a

sua - Baturalized US citizen of Raitian birth, official of a US. import-
‘ oo " export company. Source's business activities make it necessavy

_, @f the Caribbean area. During such trips, he maintains existing —
“business and a pereonal contacts and severe new ones.

I have 2 heard that Cldmrd Joseph Charles may be released at .

end of December 1967. President Duvalier hau reportedly ‘

sent people to restore Charles’ residence to its former state - °‘
end bas ordered the return of the items vhich vere stolen fron

. the house at the time of Charles’ arrest. Duvalier has also

ordered nav clothas to be sent to Charles in jail,

1

[oomprpanrran | | conprpantrar |

nisin ‘of this document lt lieviod fe civihan emaloyeat end active “day anilite - peisonnd within ‘he Inetigonee foal -
fhe gases ee, and ta Ihave tentor officials ol the mombar tavncien who mu net pen ef the ormation. Hawevet, unter agree control conivoled ° ‘ -
secerdence with paagrenh Fol ACID fA, it may be released to thas empensniy 9 depasimants and agencies of the U. §. Government diagily on
erpeling in the production at Natianal Iniethgence, IT SHALL NO! 8 a ith MINANO” 0 CONTRACTORS. thal not be ditteminated fo organigy ‘
o Monennel ieluding contultanis, under @ contractual releianthip to the U. $ Government withoul the | weiiten permusion ot the ariginater ‘ A

Hf


--- Page 94 ---
14-0000

+ PEER Gee AIEEE TIMBE AAS Sor aee ye gneeeLetortiesat nn eoeeage

| -  : eos grhteerney a
is . * ; . SECRET vere: ~das - “a, ,
| i
t
3
§Y-909-67 :

20 October 1967.

Gubject: Case 47,540 = Reported Relationship Between Eaitian od
Benker Clemra Joseph Charles ‘and Colonel. Max Doninique,
Son-in-Law of Haitian: President Dualier : “a

. 2. Ca 6 October 1967, Louis A. Brun, President, B & B
_ international 82

able to supply
tionship, ke believes that it is political in nature and

_ Concerning plots to \mseat the President.

Brun also stated that. Domini que is-schedulea to arrive
‘i Torallane} © Tisit in the near. future (no additional

ee

Dd |-35 7027 |

4 {


--- Page 95 ---
14-0000

_ eo. ne. ye & , OOP, SOD 4, 005, CAO 4, CI, WH/COG 8, WH/REG 8, WH/7/H/RE 3.

|
|

ae “(Cus : ol - 357710 24
fary TOCSDB-315/03967-67

CLassivy to # , a iv? MTP 1202
te wo. . GLASSH sre DMESSAGE TOTAL

TS Gl ee | SECRETS

orsteoy (sic.
anv. cory

7} #ssveo (7) skorreo ay:

Orssem ov ore e

“S$ EC RET OS16302 CITE PORT.AU PRINCE 4226 RACHFIELD ACTING: ~~: |

DIRECTOR INFO PANAMA CITY, REP/LANT, SANTO DOMINGO, umwavE > Oct 7 - -

INTEL ; oe, oa.

SUPDATA “PARA 1 EVLEMON 2 FROM EVLEMON 1400 4677
PARA 2 EVLENON 2 FROM EVLENON 5 .

FILED 031652z

- GeECoR-E-T



--- Page 96 ---
14-0000

wee

“S CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY - © ROUTINE ‘
Intelligence Information Cable *% _ &877 4
; PAGE 1 OF 2 PAGES - -"
STATE/ANA cyy Nwccsmc tsecoer sce aARnuy wave altar cla Nec wic BA oca spo = .
——— morn $US
BR STE SU Ramm erent SL Pe ra Me Te va
. . . a ’
NO FOREIGN DISSEM / CONTROLLED O1SSEM ; | Sa] ot
His 1S AN INFORMATION REPORT, NOT FINALLY EVALUATED INTELLIGENCE. _ a
: 0322382 CTE TOCS ~ . ,
e-con-e-t 3 08-315/65962-67 j :
so ; OST 3 OCTOBER 1967
COUNTRY. HAITI - rrr as

bol “3@ SEPT 1967). ;

“ guByecT ge ATTEMPTS ‘BY HAITIAN GOVERNMENT TO GET
4 Te , MONEY FROM THE SWISS BANK ACCOUNT: oF’

v8 oy REE Sy CLEMARD JOSEPH CHARLES.

-POSSIBLE RELEASE OF CLEMARD JOSEPH a -
’ CHARLES FROM PRISON. ee _
' @ OCTOBER 1967, PORT AU PRINCE, HAITI, HTP LI@l

| A FORMER HAITIAN “GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEE wHO was
OUEKE CONFIDENCE _OF MANY MEMBERS OF. THE:
DUVALIER .“GOVERAMENT. > ure REPORTING HAS BEEW
i ACCURATE SINCE 1965, WE RECEIVED THE. °°
f IWFORMATION FOR PARAGRAPH: | FROM A HAITIAN
I: WELITARY OFFICER WHO IS ANTI-DUVALIER BUT WHO
HAS. CONFIDENTIAL ACCESS TO KEY MEMBERS. OF THE Bh de
“cen SCO GVALEER ENTOURAGE. HIS INFORMATION = |
MAS PROVED ACCURATE DURING THE SHORT PERIOD
,OF WIS REPORTING. PARAGRAPH 2 RECEIVED _

NO FOREIGN DISSEM / ConTHOLLED D pISsSEN

-  GahoCoR-EoT


--- Page 97 ---
14-0000

See GOOF *“initions we ene me anaes move ne anime ree

m = 64877 ob
TOCS 08-315/03967-67 >

PAGE2 OF 2 PAGES = =:
S-E-C-R-E-T NO FOREIGN DISSEM / CONTRALED DISSEM = ane

| _
‘ FROM A HAITIAN MILITARY OFFICER WHO IS -
a : = OPPOSED TO DUVALIER, WHO HAS ACCESS TO THE

FILES OF A HAITIAN INTELLIGENCE SERVICE,
AND WHO HAS FURNISHED RELIABLE. INFORMATION,

civ + te ON-IS RECENT TRIP 10 EUROPE HERVE BOYER, EX- a
. >) MUEMIZSTER OF CONNERCE AND FINANCE“! “(PORTION MISSING): Ms
- be oe VFRANCOLS DUVALIER. - BOYER HAD WITH HIM \
_ “TWO BLANK CHECKS OW A SWISS BANK WHICH HAD BEEN SIGNED
- UPON INSTRUCTIONS FROM DUVALIER BY CLEMARD JOSEPH CHARLES,
"EX DIRECTOR OF THE COMMERCIAL BANK OF HAITI, BOYER»
WAS SHOCKED WHEN THE SWISS BANK REFUSED TO HONOR THE
“CHECKS, 7
‘g. 17 18 STRONGLY RUMORED WITHIN THE DUVALIER..
GOVERNMENT THAT CLENARD JOSEPH chanLes WILL SOON BE
RELEASED: FROM PRISON, . .
3S. FIELD DISSEN: STATE, ARMY, CINCLANT, caNeso,
XALSO SENT SANTO DOMINGO)
%, HEADQUARTERS COMMENT: MISSING PORYION WILL 88 DISSEMINATED ONLY IF T
MATERIALLY AFFECTS THE SENSE OF THIS REPORT.

: 4 eee
SECRET ACen DISSEM 7 CONTROLLED a)

\..
t


--- Page 98 ---
14-0000

a ee ee REN Ae ee —

CHARLES, JOSEPH CLEMARD

201-357629 ; 036-006-020/03
$x" 008 ? , UPGA-2a501

19 SEP 67
cir HAITE eo...
Occ Pv. ped
< MALTI
SU8d RPTOLY IS STIUL ALIVE.

“WTPAIRGOS

ar GST ver cescievs sreicon sa

” : :
EA ape ten TO cee REN NEI MEE SNE Dre



--- Page 99 ---
14-0000

. Y
DATE: 8 AUGUST 1967 a
CLASSIFICATION: CONFIDEMITAL == = ee ne

_ SUBJECT: JOSEPH CLEMARD CHARLES > a 2 = oo

a INTERNAL SECURITY - HAITI Dot

FBI FILE NO: NONE GIVEN. (NEW YORK) a : ,

eites

iz



--- Page 100 ---
14-0000

Information Only -

Forwarded under separate cover 16 @ Memorandum. for the Record
prepared by an LNGOLD Official on the reported plotting by Cleaard
Joseph Charles to overthrow the Duvalier regime. The memorandum

, ‘was prepared op » che basis of a conversation held with ‘a representative

of Charlee in Washington on 29 June 190/.

Harold 0. CHAIDEZ
Distribution: ,
. - COS, Port au Prince

Attachment:
1. - Menorandun, U.8.C.

® LEASING:
OFFICE TO, DATE OFFICER'S <¥ ¢ ,
: G

c/n/7 IHS uf “6! Siar dod”

reemavious aoiON, a “ oe ” me 4 7 A



--- Page 101 ---
14-0000

a . ne ny:
FRET ee . 4 a

O eo gO conan SE I ccaee -

. ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET j 7

{ SUBJECT. (Optional) ° 7 or

Des /Operational Support Start 2268 ba : : 4
900 Key Building : . 7 :

Attached for your retention *
is Clemard Charles' letter :
carried by Mr. Brun which was
passed to our New York Office | 3 7 :
and in turn delivered to Mrs. .
Matjack. Mra. Mat jack bucked By
this copy to us. She also . .
encouraged Mr. Brun to use our
- New York Office for similar ~~
transmittals. Brun also passed
@ copy of his 10 page “opus”
dated 20 June 1967 to Mrs. Mat- [> ¢ .
lack. A-copy.of this report ~ fot
was previously furnished your :
office, _ . . j

E ae

aos SECRET oO. Con pantink CO erraa o UNCLASSIFIED

“eat

yh saa,



--- Page 102 ---
14-00000

Fgnque Coy MEncIALE “Marri _ *
SOCIETE ANONYME DE BANQUIE ‘
au Capitan Aurouise pe Ux Mituios Deux Gent Cixotasi® Mitin Gorenes

, “

; ADAERSE TELRORAPHIOUE , ’ . , . . Bios Soci. er Buncau Prema,
% : CONUANK Loe . Bue we Censae
i, - P,0. BOx 1007 Po r Portau PRINCE, HAUITT
.) Chmann Josern Coanies : 4c HT AU: Mutncn June 6, .21967. i
. te PREWOENT a1 BIRECTEUN wavenince COULKs 4 j
~ vee - . : | - _
; ‘ . MiseD. K. Matlack : coo F
. CACSI/DA - '
Washington 25, DC. - PIQENTIA :
+
Dear Hiss Matlacks .
; May I recall the kind reception you . | t
gave me in May 1962, when I was in ‘inohington, also — H
' your courtesy in recommending me the Alban Towers "
. Hotel, 3700 Massachusetts Avonue, whore I lodged in

Room 522. You will remember the converoution I hed
with you regarding the future of my country, and the
hope I expressed that the assistance of the Us Ss

, Would not fail us. .

I have earnostly worked ‘since in
order that Haiti may be relieved from the tyranny
and misery in which has been inconsidorstely throw, - -
and have succeeded in securing the eympathy anid sup-
port of a great majority of the populo sions all ovor
. .. , the Republic, including religious poopie, burinessnen,

: Coo professionals, intellectuals, eto. A plan has been |
prepared ond will be exeoutéd by a Nilitiry man who.”
has with him most-of the officers in. the’ Army. Those |
people are ready and eager to begin operations and _
are only avaiting word from mo. so :

I would havo already given then
éxder to strike, through the Chiof who ia the only |
- @ne in contact with me, were 4¢ not ror my approhens= |

don that tho turmoi] that will noocorarily follow ~ —  .
might serve Castro's plan to introducs comuniss ag- * *
dtatora in the country. I aleo have rougcn to wonder -
bout Bulaguer's pooition on account of hie friendly oa
: feelings for Duvaliex. Therefore, before going any ‘
further, I fool that it would bo wise for mato have -
the U.S. assurance that these two foruva will be .
- properly neutralized, and I an requostiu; your kind

Qcoperation so that this assurance may be given to mo.



--- Page 103 ---
14-0000

nee

; pRanour CoMMERCIALE eVair1 ‘ .
TO. . SOCIETE ANONYME pE BANGUE
tee 40 Cartan Avrouse ne Ux Meuron Deux’

%
Cnr Cingvants Mine Gounors Hy °
i
AOMESEE TeLeonamnrous : Stes Sociat er Mumeau Panciea, : v j
COMDANK _ te , ’ Hon we Cena sy
® 0. 80x 1007 POIT-AU Winer, marry : .
» 6 4 Checann Jouzen Grants . a Fom-au-Pemex—Juna_6, BT. ' :
PAgeIDENT EF OMmecrEUR 2 Rersnrnce Gonfd,__
Page 2..

T have requeated
. : date in Tew York, Mr. Louis A. Brun, t

: Respectfully youre, .



--- Page 104 ---
14-0000

“ee

: 2 o diane ot)
. ¢

oe

She following ts ny humble appraisi.l of the political situation
now prevailing in Haiti. . soe : . “ . ;

&s 1 repeatedly stat:d to anyong who may have asked ne 2 BY HOLL:
vations are purely patriotic while I om also moved by 4 sincexe Guslre
to éee Uniti cuerge as a democratic independent natica friendly.to the
United States.” : ;

Since I lef % Haiti with my fanily tea years ago to later vecone on
deer eitizea, T have made suveral trins to Haiti and have maintained .
Clore contacts with people in all walks of life both in Haits and with
those who were forced out of the country for political reasons or other-

“wise, . J . cas a .
My latest Visit to Haiti took place on, June Sth of this ycar and I

“ stoyed two days in Port-au-Prince. Aitheugh the purpose of ny Arips

were mostly business I also had the opportunity to discuss the Haitjan — -

political situation with politicians, as well as with average Haitian
-. @dtizens concerned with the situation, “yy personal conclusions are 6s
fNows: . . :

The fact is that the Duvalicr regina is, at prescit, ina state or
internal political confusion in. vh! ch no one. directly or indirectly con-
' tected with it cen predict the outcome, There ia stroug evidence showing
_ that his son-in-law, Colonel Max Dominique, has.in fact tried to overthrow
, Davalier in order to personally assure the direction of Haiti's political
affairs. How Duvalier became aware of Colonel Dominique's intentions is
: the question everybody is trying te find the answer to. “Neverticless,
.Davalier rounded up the alledged associates oF Colonel Dominique ani,
: ‘after @ wock court martlal accusing and convineing 19 young amy efticors
‘ of. treason they were all killed by a firing squad on cuno 8, 19¢7 at
a Fort Dinanche on the outskirts of Port-au-Prinse. Duvalfor Aimaalt yas
“present at the slaughter and he ordered Col. Dominique to be a member of
‘the firing squad. Noneconfirmed information from usually rallable suurces



--- Page 105 ---
”

Andicates thas several other persons, low ras: .ing military personnel,
“\militde men and civilians were also executed or sdwilez charges, without
fanfare. Jt is-ulso the general ‘concensus of opinion that the. "purge"
will continuc at a rate that. no one ean yet deteraine, - :
*tYo one ignores: that there has been and st412 are very hostile feelings:
between’ wwo” Groups within the President's family ard close associates.
One is headed by Colonel Dominique and his wife Marie-Denise Dauvalier,
_ end another ‘is ded by i es.” Yvon St.Vietor, the President's: private: sen
" eretary ani confidunte. The nanes of the President's wife, Simone, his.
son Jean-Claude and his younger daughter Sinone, are pethy- mentioned as:
being part of the first Group. Inthe second. group, Urs. St. Victor's
brother, the, present Head of the Departnent of Tourisn, Nr. Luc-Albert i
Foucard, wi who is. also married to one of the Prestamnt's daughter, is among \
other nanes such as Henri Sielait, head of. the Regie, Minister Lebert |
Jn.Pierre, etc. mentioned to be siding with Mrs. St.Victor. ‘So far, the
". President has showa signs that he favers.the latter group. The ranifica- .
".tdons of both groups extend to people who were considered the most fanatic @.
-, Sapporters of Duvalier hinself, The fact 1s that none of the renaining
" so-called strong men of Buvafier in the militia, the ‘Tonton Macoutes or -
_- the’ Arity know for sire how the. president fcels towards them and are. very ,
mie conceried about their own fiture and survivel. In other words, :
‘eonfusion and ineeceurity are wide spread amongst Davalier's followers.
. I valieve thet in spite of the-actual confusion ‘and sense of insecurity
prevailing in. government circles, there is no real orgenized opposition

‘ae Buch Ocainst Divalicr at, this moment, except for what I will point out.
later ‘in. thia paper. _

There is, however, - strong antieluvalicr teclings in the middie and .
upper classes of Haiti, roprosenting: only @.emall percentage of the whole
population, A segment of the population to be taken into vory serious

onsideration 16 the. ono made up of the people living in. the elum areas,



--- Page 106 ---
14-00000

doth within ani on the out tekirts of Port-nu~Prince. ‘hese pouple to de
; differentiated vith the rural peasants, live in abjcel poverty with ne
: -estublished xeans of subsistance,’ and represent ‘the més volatile and.
a Gungeros political force to be watched closely in the event oF any | 7
et sigatficans develoyent of the politicel and social situation. These — sh
peodle which foracd, in 1956 and 1957, the core of former president
Deotel Ficnole's followers, ean be swung to any movesent and play a
decisive yale in the confusion that rey ‘arise inthe event of a coup. ae
He ave cenvineed that these people will weleoue a change should any JF
" dezagogue lend them to believe that they will benefit by such a chenge. |
Iaa inforsed that in Port-au-Prince there are some ‘political per= .
“sonslities, in and out of the Governnent, that are waiting for an op= 4 ~
. ‘portunity to’ swing that scetor in their favor, whenever a serious at-  ~ \ :
_ tempt to overthrow Duvalier is made, whether by then or anyone’ else. :
Under those circumstances, Duvalier loosing his old grip on key.
_@lements comaitted to his support, a large portion ofswhich he has
recently liquidated, is trying to instore a new politicsl philosophy ~
resehing out for elements of the middle cluss a. sll as. those of the >
slum areas mentioned above. «I have a focling that the new philosophy ‘is
aimed at antegonizirig the U.S. Government for its hands-off policies and
“the econoaie squeeze applied by the U.S, against his government. This
Jentagonisa will go as far as necossary cven.to an almost impossible al-
| Utenee sith communist countries such as Cuba or other communist nations
of Burope, Africa or Asia, As evidence of that direction in Duvalier's
" Government, he has allowed the so-called "Little Red Book". of Chainaan’
‘+ Mao-Sse-Tung of Communist China to otreulate freely in Haiti, whercas
\ previously the suse took was banned end neized in local libruiries ond
JRevastezds in Haiti. “Several articles appearing in local Haitian nows-
popara have lately referred with much emphasis to the "Cultural. Revolution" :
of Davolier which has. yet to take place. The appointment in his newly .
' formed cabinet of three Blanchet brothers, all well-known cownnist
‘aympathisare, ie alse on indication of his subtle shift tovarde «



--- Page 107 ---
14-00000

radicully leftist oriented Government.

If allowed tine, Davalier moy
. weil succeed to turn the country into a new communist satellite and vork ~
: out sone agreements with communist countries, Here szain, we should not
fail to mention the-new exchange of diplomatic representations between
Baits end some communist countries. The most significant one is the nev.
appointrent in Haiti of an Ambassador from Poland with whoa,I was told, = /
Duvalier is closely worxing with. : ,
_ ‘Taking everything into consideration:
_ 1. The non existence of any organized opposition-in Natct; 9° | a
‘2. The stace of non cohesiveness: and distrust enongst tre exiled

political elements abroad, therefore nullifying any Posinive action fron
cutside Haiti; © .

. i

: 3. Tne fear of local politicians that, if outsiae forces were to come.
_ du, their safety and security would be very much at stake, therevore they,
should resist such intervention and do whatever is necessary to prevent \
it at all cost; . * .
4, The fear of Duvalier's so-called ollowers that they may be elininated os
upon mere suspicion, juct or unjust dendticiations; .
- $. Tae middle and upper classes sentiment that the U.S, is not vorking
"ae it. should to bring ebout the dovnfall of Duvalier-and’that the U.S. is-
- @ven supporting the regime. intentionally or unintentionally Sy not en=
.» | -@0uraging or allowing the opposition to organize itself; i
: ' 6, Tae interpretation of the above classes which are.at a loss tq under,
tend the silence of the U.S. press in general for not having raised the.
‘usual indignation about the recent mass killings, therefore making room _
' }fox the belief of @ possible collusion by means of money or otherwise of .
‘Duvalier with said press, particularly the New York Times, to rerrain from ;
bringing these facts to the attention of international, PAdlic opinion; _ j .
7. The strong belie? thes compromises have been worked out with Presidant
Balaguer in the Dominican epublic to return to Haiti all opponents of -

e

ne ke y

:
i



--- Page 108 ---
14-0000

“actions are not to be desired, not only because they are costly to the

; that communist influence and even control of the situation by forces
+ based iri Cuba and other countries, will make it mich more difficult. to
: cope with within the context of our national security.

financially and otherwise, to sccure an orderly succession of the present
‘regime.

this nation or any nation is concerned, there is no time for waiteand=see

It would be childish, however, to formulate an opinion only on the
basis (of the mentioned facts, although on the surface, they appear’
Logical enough to confirma these conclusions. © : ~ .

-_ I en’ convenced in ny ow mind, that when sone politicians clese to en
Duvalier will feel that their lives are in real dancer, soze of then ; on
will successfully attempt to eliminate him even though they may not be, _ :
thezselves, in a position to control the chaotic situation- that will ne}
cessarily follow, -This-is where the real danger is. If any such une
planned action was allowed to wake place, the U.S. will then find itself
with a reel “not potato", requiring such drastic action st=t

intlas to, those
takin in 1965 durfng the recent crisis in the Dominican Republic. Such_

‘merican taxpayers, but because they inevitably provoke strong anti-
American feelings based on the opinion that the U.S. did nothing to help
bring about the collapse, but is merely there to impose its choice“and © |
decisions against the will of the people. If the U.S. is tc wait for the.
OAS to decide on joint action in the eventuality of chaos, we are sfraid.

It.is, therefore,
‘imperative, in our opinion,..that the U.S, take some steps towards working

with local politicians to take the initiative ofa coup which, when per~ .
‘formed, would receive the strong backing of this country, militarily,

As far as, Haiti is concerned, I feel that I have. the ‘most. adequate
solution for the proposed action.

I feel that whenever the security of

eoneiderations, In the case. of Haiti, in particular, where the political

cene is really deprived of individuals of strong convictions, one way or
“the other, we fesl. that the U.S. should not have any problem in finding
someonc that they can: build politically and work with in 6, eincers and
loyal effort to help that. small nation relve some of ite perennial probless.



--- Page 109 ---
14-0000

: a oe .
4 ; : -~6-<
.
. In connection with the possibiiity of Sinding a political leader,
as indicated above, I must say that I have been in contact with a man
whom, I feel, could very well. i: 1 the position. His name is Clérard —
Joseph Chazles, President of Ba. :e Gosmereiale d'Maiti, President of
Eaiti's Cnanber of Commerce, a U..ccter of several other business and
industrial organizetions in Haiti.

I have known <r. Charles sinc: 1951. ke have been friends and .
business associates eversince. To ne, Xe. Charles is a true and sincere
patriot. OF course, today, a number of people question his patriotis: ”
on the basis of his close cooperation witn the Duvalier regime. I have
nyself, sonetimes, felt.that he went too far. I have also told ‘hin sO,
pany times. His- answers on such occasions Rave, most of the cine, satisfy ;
my own judgenent. In fact, Mr. Charles told me that, Knowing Duvalier, *.) | -

. as he knows him, it would have been a question of life or death if he
were to behave in a different mannez>.. What would his death serve if he
Red taken a position of non-compromise? He feels that th order to be: ~
. sble to control the situaticn and outlive Duvalier, it was better to be -
““in"" than “out"™ or to put it another way to be alive than dead. _ Tecan.
sey that on several occasions, was it not for. Nr. ‘Charles'. influence on -
‘ Duvalier, this latter would have done more harm to the poor pelple of
wate, in general, than he has done so for, ;
“ft ave always maintained a dialogue with Mr. Charles.and passed on to
Bia as mich as possible the judgements of Haitians and others with vhom
he had no direct contact. I must say that I have. always find hin Frew -
jeptive to their opinions. ; oe
Eversince f have known Mr, Chaves, ne has civays ‘gold me of his
ambitions and determination te.be a great Haitian. He asked me to never
let him.dowm and to stay with him to help hin. carry out his dream. Though
it has cost me some: of my friends, I have extonded to him everything that
T could poceibly offer to help him reach hie goals,
‘"Unlike the majority of leitian pol. ‘tiaiona, Mr. Charles has an une
Gumontable faith in the future of hia country, He fuele-thot if Hoitd,



--- Page 110 ---
14-0000

where, lixe a niracle, the country will asain taxe its course forward
to join the ether srocressive nations of this hexisphere.

Unlike tnose
politicians wo have seen their prominent positions as a temporaty state
of affairs with absolutely no future beyond Duvalier, Mr. Charles has
| -préetically invested in Haiti aimost all the wealth that he has accumlos ~ 7

ted before and during Divalier's reign throucn cenuine efforts ond sclf=
aiecipline.

ine:

Of course, I will adait.that nis wealth would not have .
eused in its present proportion if it was not for Duvalier's favors
tO mum. lat woo else under the previous recizes wane” “were in the sexe Log a
position have genuinely ‘directed: their efforts in using “Rheir gains Zor: we
the betterment of the people? I have always ‘Pind that ae, Caarles took
very much satisfaction in giving employsent and assistance to as many.
_ people es ne possibly could. As a matter of fact this is one of his . Ve :
biggest assets in his present struggle. . : rn
Mr. Cnorles is not a demagogue. He believes in the realities of the AE
modern world. He realizes that without the assistarce*of the U.S., — :
progress is impossible for Haiti. He sincerely believes in ‘the spirit
of the Alliance for Progress. Having traveled «xtensively, he is fully . ‘
aware of the tragic state of staznation in which his country is in. He: a
"| deeply wiches to see Haiti make sone progress’ in. the flelds of human
__ dignity, education,. technology and sbove:all, Freedom,
. All that I have said so ‘tar are my ovn personal opinion and also the
, opinion of a large number of people in and out of Haiti. If some defer .
in their evaluation of Mr. Charles, it is their privilege and undeniable
rights. : . . .
Now, 4f wa are to take for granted : ny opinions, what docs Nr. Charles -
have to offer to the U.S. to prevent the chaos that will necessarily
fellow Duvalier's downfall? Firat of all, Mr. Caarles is at present
reety_end willing to provoke the desired collapse of Duvalier's regime.
Tate, he assured mo, he can do without any outside assistance. I am
‘personally avere of certain confidential dispositions. taken by him to
cure ‘the success of @ coup. if and when he decides to.make it. Why does



--- Page 111 ---
14-0000

Yy

not he co chead and sake it, you may ack? His reply fs tht should

‘he moke it, what absurances does he have that his action will. satisfy .
the U.S. As I stated before, Mr. Charles feels that without United
States dscking, no goverazent can possibly exist in Haiti except under .
the very same conditions ef Duvalier's Government. There would be no.”

_ Feason to precipitate a change if Haiti were to renain under a *yronical
" dictatorship like Duvalierts. . ve
- What Mr. Charles is ‘asking asa prerequisite of any ‘action to be a
‘ spunsored or initiated by him is’ the assurance from a person of established
euthority in the U.S. Governnent that the United States will ‘support, “the
provisional government that will necessarily have to assure power after
- Duvalier, : . .
Te dispositions taken bs Mee es are that a military « coup by a
Junta will take over and stay in power until free elections are held. The
‘ members of that military junta have been already selected by Mr. Charles, -
\ who has their commitments to that effect. Hr. Charles pulieve that if.
free elections are hel he should not have any great difficulty in selling - :
_ Ads plans and progrens to the people and. therefore be elected the next —
president of Haiti.. In ny opinion, Mr. Charles is ‘not ‘asking too much:
Should the United States consent to his- -request in the form mentioned
‘above, I feel that the Haitian situation, long a sore note in the U.S. ©
hemispheric relations, could be changed without risk for oll parties ..
concerned. , : : A
\ Why should the United States gasble on any other calculated riak,
Walle i feel, it can wrap up the situation safely in accord with Mr.Charles'
"plans? The military juntea proposed by Mr. Charles will be made up ‘by. hich
ranking officers of the Haitian amy loyal to him, therefore on the side
-of the U.S. With U.S. assistance - 1t is almost impossible othervise = the
teps proposed by Mr. Charles after the Junta will take over are ag follows:
‘1. Disarm: the Militia and the Tonton Macoutes imnediately;
« Reorganize the Army and the Covernment services; a 7S *
.3e Prevent tha interference of Conminiet forces made of ‘exiles. Haitians
based in Guba or srsevnare)



--- Page 112 ---
14-0000

Karananr set as Pry 9 lames wee eae oon etn wage tf AE Rene Rn REITER BRA tes eens

ge ee oe

ae wee wee De eee ewe

&. Preveat the return to the Haitian political scene of cuch “rebble~ |
rouscr” so-called leaders as Dantel Fignole ané Henri Vixoxar;

- 5. Starz the cround work for free ‘elections as soon as possible.
ron Crarles feels that although it will provably te impossible to pre=
vent ects ee reprisals during the first 72 hours oF the military take
over, strong efforts Should be made to avoid unnecessary bloodshed. —

Ro. Gherles, ia By opinion, ts one of tne Zev. individuals around who
@ reconciliation of all the social divisions ana subdivisions of the
Haition family can be achieved. I will mention sone of she basic reasons
deni: na this cpinton: ‘

“Ql. He is of modest sural “extraction, therefore is what is called ia’
- Haiti a "sen of the “passes";. a
+p - 6 Me ds vlack, therefore representing the vast majority ‘2 the .
“Raitian pecple who, at this point, considers the light-skin Haitifin as
@ threat for the return of the domination of the rulatte minority;
3. He is deprived of the prejudice of color, therefore the mulatto
minority will find in him a certain feeling of security and can be as~.—

: wared that it will not be. Persecuted. soiely on the basis of “the color of”
7 thetr skins; - .

‘b. He is wealthy, therefore credited for not enbitioning } pover for
mere personal gains; - - .
. .9e He is known to be a hard, Antelligent industriatist and adminis~

_ trator capable of promoting and encouraging the establishment of new,
business and industries in Uaits; .

_ 6. Re has shown respect for certain moral values such as. the undeniable -
rignt of the individual, to live, without fear within the Trancwork of the
Laws of the land; . . . - OY

: “% He isa Roman: Catholic who professes ) have nothing to -ds with
-,"Voodeo" as.a religion ora cult and who has given all the other religious.
“@enominations functioning in. Haiti all the evidence of hie sncouragenont
and suppers for their pastoral activities;



--- Page 113 ---
14-0000

cones te ete

rer ern went rn ana —— :

m™.- oe
ww
~ A.
'8. Being a businesszan in his: own right, the cusiness comunity with . ce oes
whieh he hes decit through tne Chamber of Commerce and his bank will a re

always have a. ciolome with him and therefore wilt

find hin receptive: ‘
to their suggestions anc er.<ceavours;

. . 9. Reving dealt with elexents of the actucl regine wae uve. his

confidence, he will te able to control then ina way which will aveia
- unnecessary hardships st

should someone else = a conplete stranger to thea =
be in a posivion of Gcvernment leadersnin;

- 20. He is known to be strong RELY aati-cozmnist ene pré-inext ean, “there.

: fore opening the door. to close ecoperation with the United States, under i

_ the doctrine of the Alliance for Progress, t: prozote better understanding X\.
and opportunities Sor the Haitian People with the help of tee United .
States; . : me

lL. He will welcoze the return of all Haitian exiles to take their ~ :

place anew within the Esitian community and to work with hin to the task

_ Of making the country a safer and better place to live; ces

~" 12. He does not “contemplate. any repri sals or even sanctions against

* anybody for their past political affiliations, his efforts. to: be mainly.
Grected not to solve the errors of the past, but to provide a better -—
present and future for those who want to live in daiti.

The task, if and when he’ ‘guocecds to gain power, will not be an easy
cnc. Tam sure, however, Anat: Mr. Charles will. be able to find ths BUpe
port of enough honest and patriotic H Haitians to help hin carry out his.
Green of building up a better Feiti. : ioe

“Ma. Charles! past affiliation with the Duwvalier ‘reginé should not,
therefore, be held exainst him. ‘s a matter of fact, this affiliation may

give hin the foresight ¢ that he should do his. utzost not to > repeat. the same -
nietekes. fo

recy eonelueion, t feet that tis U.

. ‘Governzont, through its qualities:
Agencies, should give Mr. Charles' offer to. topple the Duvoliey regime, all

the required careful sonaiderati on and make @ decision ay fast as possible.


--- Page 114 ---
14-0000

a ee a ee ST

Ee

. a ve 7 '
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD ; _ ~ June 29, 1967 - ,

; . 33:39 p.m. . 4
ARA/CAR - Edward T. Long

Plot of Cleuard Charles to ‘Overthrow Duvalier :

. . At the suggestion of Mr. Bowler, Howard L. Burris, o : :
1725 K St., N.W., a Washington businessman who served in : Vo a t
the past as an assistant military alde to the President, oF : we
telephoned this morning and asked me to meet Mr. Louis A.

Brun at Mr. Burris’ office. This I did thie, afternoon,

wr. Brun, @ nationalized Anerican, owns and. operates”

. the B & B International Corporation, 1182: Broadway, New

- ‘York. A nativesborn Haitian, he has lived in the States a
Since 1957. He is a close friend and confidant. of Clemerd -
Joseph Charles, a Haitian banker who has been deeply involved
with the Duvalfer government. Charles has fallen ia disfavor .
with Duvalier and several of his governient concessions have
been cancelled. Charles is actively plotting the overthrow .
of Duvalier and, according: to Brun whc saw. Charles in ,

- Post au Prince .June. 5-7, has..167.. -military:and: -eivilians “ready”
to move with him.~ Mone. of this: group. ‘xepresented by the’

. .19- officers who were. recently: executed or “the sd sons Heitiens =
whe vere qxeently in- siplomatic anylus..

.. ¥m the past, Charles hee unde efforts himself. and:

_- through Brun .to get the U.S. Government to coumit itself in

favor of the overthrow of Duvalier but until. recently: ali
@f these approachss were rebuffed, U. &. officiels- having

' atated U.S. policy was such thet. nc plot of this nature could. ~

. . be supported. Brun showed me: a. letter he had: just received

_. Seon Chartes Writteson June 23: stating in a coumercial langu--

_ ag@ code which Brun and Charles use in their: correspondence.

’ ghee en Auerican official last veek had met with.Charles. in -

’ Wort~auePrinca and thet Charles was. noge pleased with the. -
wenting. The implication wae thet this American" had.

fadiceted: to Charles that the U.f. Government favored the

plotting. I Flachy told Brun that the UE. | was: + BOE interested |

seer name teenth genet = nome



--- Page 115 ---
14-0000

SECRET
LIMDIS

~2e

in supporting plotting of this nature,. that our policy had
not changed, and that he should know this categorically. Brun
emilingly accepted this statement, but obviously considered
thea “approsch” in Port-au-Prince was more. important than ay —
exposition of U.S. policy, . ne

Brun seid he was in regular contact with Major Janes ~
Balog who, :he described, as an intelligence officer from the
Peatagon. jie said that he, Brun, had written a report on his
opinion re things Haitian and had given one copy to ~
Major Balog and one to Mr.: Burris, He-then handed me & copy

- which ig attached. This report is basically a plea for U.S.

prior indication to Charles that the U.S. would support any
Charles-formed provisional. goverament created following the -
overthrow of Duvalier, . oO ee

" E elosed the half hour ‘meeting with. Brun insisting again

, that he should clearly understand the U.S. Government was pot
interested in becoming involved in this sort of an operation.



--- Page 116 ---
14-0000

DEPT OF STATE ATRORAM : A-3
DATE: 7 JULY 1967
CLASSIFICATION: LIMITED OFFICIAL USE

SUBJECT: WOES OF CLEMARD JOSEPH CHARLES ‘INCREASE

FROM: : AMEMRABSY, PORT AU PRINCE :

pore

rn


--- Page 117 ---
1400000

woo SRD ves. *9 5 —
Cuassive to ee note 0 = Casstrten MESSAGE

PRIORITY DIRECTOR INFO SANTO DOMINGO, Jive
REF: PORT aU PRINCE 455(@OSOF,
CLEMALD Tose, %
1. RACHFIELD CHECKED “At SHARLES HOUSE MORNING |
6 JULY, NO NEMBERS FAMILY IN SIGHT AND TWO GUARDS with
RIFLES ON DUTY WHO SAID CHARLES AND WIFE “NOT THERE,”

OBVIOUSLY CHARLES” ‘IS UNDER ARREST, °.

2, COMMUNIQUE SIGNED BY ANTONIO ANDRE PRESIDENT
OF NATIONAL BAUK 5 JULY 1967 STATES THAT NATIONAL BANK’
HAS TAKEN CHARGE OF COWNERCIAL BANX.AND THAT “THE
“GOVERNMENT OF HAITI JUSTIFIABLY ALARMED AT.THE. SITUATION.
| XW THE. COMMERCIAL BANK HAS DECIDED TO TAKE THE NECESSARY
_ STEPS TO SEE TO IT THAT THE FORMER DIRECTOR OF THE
~ COWMERCEAL BANK OF HAITI MR. CLEMARD JOSEPH CHARLES Sues 1s
BADE TO FURNISH THE COMMERCIAL BANK WITH THE MEANS TO
PAY ITS DEBTS." THIS ‘THIS FIRET NOPTGE THAT CHMRCES TS
_-EXSDIRECTOR.
‘| secret

Peasee

be 35702 2



--- Page 118 ---
14-0000

eee ster a CALA EPEC P AAPSCE IGE TIMI ra i ,
£ .

. ‘IMMEDIATE’ DIRECTOR:

~. OFFICER THAT HE'WAS TOLD BY DUVAL IER T eo To" CHA fes- at.
* ===

* BANK ACCOUNT.

indexe o . - : ' :
woe tid ves C ne, De aan 7 SFI pcussirseo swessice Z ree 27 PRECEDENCE. :
ROREP TO FILE HO. =: ,

fice an “mer, ——

to paayen
oestroy O sic. (a L mise at

REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

1. WATIONAL BANK DIRE ct Of ANTON Io ANDRE FOLD. EMBASSY E
“@ Leman

FORT DIMANCHE ‘AND GET HIM TO ‘SIGN CHECK FOR “BALANCE ih NEY stn ge

OnTonis Orde CHOP



--- Page 119 ---
14-0000

Ne
%

5 woexs Ed ves Cheol

risguun vest

a CLassiey To rips no ere OTAL COPIES i
i ROREP TALLE NOS SECRET - }
= oie at AZT, To anancy 49 ~ ‘
i rae a Se eo 18. ae :
i ‘
i
ot
,
. a» ‘5 . t :
SECRET 2921402 CITE SANTO DOMINGO/3786 info aren ya
, Oyo es BD dub? 21 eee poy :
_ DIRECTOR INFO PORT-AU-PRINCE, JMWAVE_ a - Moetiey 5 : io {
ew “3 Gasca copigy “FL OB
Evwusce = ATE : oh H21UL COP LBe poe
1. DIRING REGULAR MEET ING AFTER NOON 27 JUNE EVMUSCLE- we sit f
SAID IN RESPONSE. TO <i rs a
“a. CLEMARD JOSEPH CHARLES IS A SLIPPERY, ‘LESS ‘THAN.
ee ——-
Je ORDINARY INTELLIGENT, AND GENERALLY WEA HAN wHO IS A TOADY

OF DUVALIER'S. CHARLES MADE ALL HIS MONEY THROUGH VARIOUS :
MANIPULATIONS It CONJUNCTION WITH OR KNOWN To DUVAL IER.
. COLONEL ACQUES LAROCHE: 15. A STRONG» INTEL LIGENT
MAN AND A Good LEADER. ‘vE IS UNACCEPTABLE AS” A “poSS IBLE -
LEADER OR HEAD OF STATE TO THINKING EXILES AND PERSONS IN HAITI

DUE TO HIS KNOWN LEFTIST SYMPATHIES AND BELIEFS OVER A LONG
PER 10D OF YEARS. DESPITE A GOVERNMENT BAN. ON OFFICERS BELONGING
TO POLITICAL PARTIES, HE WAS KNOWN AMONGST FREZNDS TO HAVE
“BEEN A SECRET MEMBER OF THE OLD PSP <PARTI SOCIALISTE- —
POPULAIRE). IT 18 NOT KNOWN IF HE IS A SINTLAR TYPE WEMBER
_ OF THE PSP’S SUCCESSCR (PEP). “WE HAS BEEN A STAUNCH. SUPPORTER:
“OF DUVALIER AND APPEARS TO ALL ASA TRUE DUVALIERIST. «
“°@y BELIEVE ABOVE MAY PROVIDE ADDITIONAL INSIGHT INTO
“THESE PERSONS WHO ARE OF CURRENT INTEREST
3. INDEX! CHARLES, LAROCHE.

BECRE SR 20/- zea ih

A gic Be et smyrna ronments sierra paneer TST ne



--- Page 120 ---
14-0000

° pave: "30 gUNE 1967:

CLASSIFICATION: CONFIDENTIAL -

§-. SUBJECT: FOREIGN POLITICAL MATTERS ~‘HATTT.

"FB FIRE Nos’ NONE GIVEN (NEW YORK) |.

. iUEATE Nt BA Ee Saas SVE

.



--- Page 121 ---
14-0000

DEP! OF STATE DOCUMENT:

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD (WASH. , D.C.)
: : . ARA/CAR
. Saal DATE: | 29 JUNE 1967 .

CLASSIFICATION: SECRET - LIMDIS

SUBJECT: ~ PLOT OF CLEVARD CHARLES TO .OVERTHROW.
DWALIER. ine

DEP OP STATE ATRORAM -A=349
CLAGSIPYCATION: . LIMITED: OFFICIAL USE -

DATE): 22 JUNE 1967 FROM AMEMBASSY, “PORT AU - = -
= . PRINCE

BUBJECT: CLEMARD. JOBEPH CHARLES FALLS FROM
GRACE |



--- Page 122 ---
14-00000

yl a

& :

,

SiR ET/SENSIT IVE 291409Z CITE CONTACTS/NEW YORK 8319 | % Y ;

bain ; d.

CONT ACT S/WASHINGTON a a Wi? .
OPERATIONAL SUPPORT STAFF crusuLIN) “FROM BALOG ~ Se, ; ;
SUBJECT? CASE 47340... . SO 4 an

CONF IRN ING PREWWO/MUSUL GN TELECON, 28 ow
fe BALOG TALKED BRUN: OUT OF PAYING A “COURTESY visite To. : i 4 ;
DOROTHY, . mo os oe
Gs BAUN WILL SEE COL. BURRIS IN WASHINTON TODAY.” arpens:
"| Se YESTERDAY BALOG INTRODUCED HARRY: REAL TO BRUN. “DURING -
BALOG'S VACATION IN JULY MARRY VILL NAINTAIN CONTACT WITH BRUM,
Ae BRUM TOLD US THAT ON 28 JUN HE RECEIVED A LETTER FRON \
|) MARTIAN BANKER. CHARLES. ADVISING. THAT -NIS KEALTH.WAS-MUCH BETTER AND
> TWAT ME WAS ABLE 10 VISIT. FRIENDS 1.” PORT=AU-PRINCE. « * APPARENTLY:
-) QHARLES* HOUSE: ARREST vas LUrTED. _ a
' @RORE testnsirive



--- Page 123 ---
14-0000

deo.

eeeRNAL C1 con JenTIAL (secret
~ ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET

. ATHAYTI
_ st ea] fe CLh SNE
=

““Saassicieo =

SUBJECT, (Optional) .
Clemard Joseph Charles

ROM eorge S, Musulin/js
UCS/Operational SupporStaff
900 Key Building

Attached copy of New York 8312
per our telephone conversstion, —
_ this date.

2. WH/7/HT
- ATTN: Messrs” Grenitlio

- we



--- Page 124 ---
14-0000

Se nwews bnweewawss Ved

Pan

™~ .. . . ; .
: 7 .
: © A
“ cag AE We -~ ,
4 he .
At li BY wo. ;
EES a eid se #
wd ae ; .
SE CRE T/SENSITIVE 2719592 CITE ‘cowtacts/vey YORK 6312. gh
-CONTACTS/VASHINGTON rs .
OPERATIONAL SUPPORT STAPF CHUSULIND. FROM BaLoo = . ne

THIS 18 SENSITIVE OS
NEAT

le IN ORDER TO UNDERSTAND THIS Tux FOLLOVING cope ust: sy -
- WATT IAN BANKER CLENARD JOSEPH CHARLES AND LUIS A. BRUN 13. auoteos
_, fe BELL & CO <= *HAJOR™ BaLoG AND DOD
ve oo a _PIRST RATIONAL CITY BANK OF NY ©= US.Gov'T
oe gig a, Be Ke & 606 == DOROTHY MATLACK OF DOD . oan
“apy xe, TNE NOWARD CORPORATION.» COL,” aun, a ronnEn ana
wets A? to PRESIDENT JOHNSON. | .
ng ae, SUSINESS TRemsacTION = HELP OF: us OVERNMENT to “CHARLES”
ip fie SL JUN GY AFTER REPEAT AFTER NIS ARREST AND
QORPINRGENT, TO HIG HOWE 18 PORT*AUSPRINCE CHARLES WiOTE PoLLovine
i PaEech-Laneunae LETTER VIA AIR HAIL. TO Louis BRLie

- Pa ® eco As nan as 5 susress ia CONCERNED | 3 RECERVZD. AT WY NONE
— @ REPARSENTATIVE OF BELL & CO, TAN VERY HAPPY WOve tf THINK VE
“WAVE HO PURTHER VCRRY CORCERWING THE. BUSINESS TRANSACTION. “ux
MCCEPIED TO SPONSOR THE BUSINESS TRANSACTION VETN De he b @y 1



--- Page 125 ---
14-0000 |

“PAGE @ CONTACTS/NEW YORK 6518S ECRET/SENSITIVE = = t
WOVARD CORPCRATION AND OTHER BUSINESS ENTERPRISES, THIS. 18 AVERY “a
BIG SUCCESS, AND I HOPE THAT WITH THE ASSISTANCE OF THE FIRST rn
MATIOWAL CITY BANK VE'LL MAKE RAPIO PROGRESS. APTER ALL OUR EVFORTS

"WILL HOT NAVE BEER | EW VAIN AND OUR FIELD. OF BUSINESS aerivity vrun
L ERLARGED<* og :
de BRUM BELIEVES THAT PAPA DUALIER “Dors WOT DARE TO KILL
CKARLES VO NAS MANY FOLLOWERS. IM NALTI" CBRE BRUN°S 10-PAQE HERO
MEO POUCHED ON R7 JUN, THIS CASE). oe

Be BRUM ILL SEE COL. LURRIS VITHIN: A FRY DAYS. wu
mur BURRIS OW LATEST DEVELOPRERTS} ALSO. VILL eve WI ‘A COPY OF

ed x? a ‘ts D TOUCH WITH CHARLES via Wall ano TRAVELER yrou
wT I Uy WAITIAN ano CANADIAN BUSINESSNEN) «.

7 88 6 We T/SENsiT IVE

eo

jee

aie Y :
ive gts natla)

sera aid
desig aiisalies

“ et ‘eal
= reap sacepeaname FuAnean are *



--- Page 126 ---
14-0000

saps mae

sien: “Daves The : one
CLassivy 10 rive ao. ter We
R-MeF To File Ho

FILE mo Oe |
cesteoy Ms 2c y l _

NOTIFICATION TO

aov. copy
suco (7) sorvee ev:

Fosier

syptets Mos

MTEL SS Poo

SUPDATA —--EVLEMWON-2 FROM EVLEMON-19
FILED 2720552, :



--- Page 127 ---
14-0000

ca : eee. — eS . u ip
= CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY: * ROUTINE = 5,
i Intelligence Information Cable’ ™ _ oozes i
i : PAGE} OF 4 paces;
STATE/INA ry NMCC/mC (S8ECOEP sce ARMY NAVY AIRD cia/nucc on ‘One one sc0O alo : ¢
NO FOREIGN DISseM/conTROLi. ED DISSEM _ Sa '
rs 5A TNFORMATION REPORT. RST FINALLY VACATED VELLORE" SRA ECO RE '
“SECT 2902122 CITE TOCS DB~315/02404-67
ae (IST: 28 YUNE 1967
“COUNTRY = OHAITE. es Op comoe eee
por 25 JUNE 1967 wet .
SUBJECT | VIEWS OF GENERAL GERARD CONSTANT ON PRESENT SITUATION
ACO”... 86 JUNE 1967, PORT AU PRINCE, HAITI, HTP-1072 -. 7
SOURCE -- A FORMER HAITIAN GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEE WHO KAS — NO
THE CONFIDENCE OF NANY MEMBERS OF THE - cS ee
DUVALIER GOVERNWENT. HIS REPORTING Has aa
BEEN ACCURATE SINCE 1963. “HE RECEIVED THE _

INFORMATION FROM A HIGH RANKING OFFICER IN ~~...
THE HAITIAN ARMED FORCES WHO IS CLOSE TO —

“ple ‘THE REASONS FOR PRESIDENT FRANCOLS DUVALIER’S
' MBASURES AGAINST. CLEMARD- JOSEPH CHARLES, PRESIDENT OF
_ THE COMMERCIAL BANK RE. NOT HARD. TO FIND QUVALIER Has



--- Page 128 ---
14-0000

a ee

i | e S-E~C-R-E-T NO FOREIGN DISSEM/CONTROLLED DISSEM

-} °- LEARWED THE LESSONS OF HAITIAN HISTORY, PRESIDENT ESTIME :

iN 00388 e
HESDB~315/02404-67° :

|
PAGE 2 OF 4 PAGES . a fi

i

|

cemeafctesetpemtioryy (ete cor) er

AND PRESIDENT PAUL MAGLOIRE WERE OVETHROWN BY THEIR |

CLOSE ASSOCIATES. DUVALIER HIMSELF WAS IN THE 7

FOREFRONT OF THOSE CONSPIRACIES AND KNOWS FROM . ip eo
i

_ PERSONAL EXPERIENCE THE MOTIVATION OF THE PLOTTERS.
WHEN HE GETS RID OF MILITARY MEN OR CIVILIANS FROM
TIME TO TIME EVEN THOUGH THEY HELFED HIM GAIN POWER,

IT IS BECAUSE AS CHIEF OF STATE. WE IS FULLY AWARE OF

“THE REALITIES O7 HAITIAN POLITICS. CLEMARD JOSEPH
CHARLES, WHO GAINED MUCH OF WHAT HE HAS UNDER MAGLOIRE,

"WAS AMONG THOSE WHO FINANCED DUVALIER'S CAMPAIGN. -

‘AT IS ONLY LOGICAL THAT DUVALIER WOULD RESENT THAT”

“FACT. “FURTHERMORE, SINCE CHARLES 1S ACTUALLY A

ANDIDATE FOR-THE PRESIDENCY AND -MAVEUVERING =. 2)

AGAINST DUVALIER, DUVALIER WILL DISCOVER some “EVIDENCE”

frwctne CHARLES WITH THE NINETEEN EXECUTED OFFICERS.

f 16 ALSO TRUE THAT CHARLES WAS NOT REALLY

_AN ASSOCIATE OF DUVALIER’S. HE WAS REALLY NOTHING

NORE THAN AN: EMPLOYEE. IT WAS NOT BECAUSE OF HIS.
‘SPRETTY. EYES THAT DUVALIER MADE CHARLES THE CONTROLLER

FOREIGN DISSEM/CONTROLLED DISSEM



--- Page 129 ---
14-0000

“? a a pte nen, 00388
, ‘ . _. OCS DB-315/02404-67

. . _ "PAGE 3 OF 4 PAGES

(diasem controls) ~

; OF A NuMork OF GUvenaeNl MONUPULIES, DOVALIER .
‘ARRANGED THIS FOR HIS OWN PURPOSES, HE NEEDED TO HAVE
"A BANK TO RECEIVE. NON-FISCAL DEPOSITS FROM WHICH HE:
_ COULD MAKE WITHDRAWALS ASHE WISHED. OUT oF THIS ALSO
GREW ANOTH ER REASON WHY DUVALIER IS ANGRY AT CHARLES. © a
"WHEN THE NON-FISCAL ACCOUNTS IN’ THE COMMERCIAL BANK RAN
DRY, THE BANK ADVANCED THE GOVERNMENT MONEY AGAINST BONDS.
CHARLES USED THESE BONDS IN HIS FINANCIAL MANIPULATIONS © ~ -’
"LAND THEY FELL INTO THE HANDS OF FOREIGN SPECULATORS WHO:
“ARE NOW DEMANDING PAYMENT, =
3. PLOTS SUCH AS CHARLES WAS ENGAGED IN WILL:
NOT SUCCEED. DUVALIER HAS'SO ORGANIZED THE GOVERNMENT |
"THAT THE OLD WAYS OF OVERTHROWING A REGIME. ARE DENIED
; TO CONSPIRATORS, HE IS NOT INVULNERABLE BUT ONLY BY:
ASSASSINATION WILL HE BE REMOVED. HIS GOVERNMENT IS .
BASED ON TERROR AND INTIMIDATION. THE BOLD STROKE IS)
_ HIS STRENGTH. HE EXECUTED THE NINETEEN OFFICERS IN ORDER |
TO STRIKE THE POPULAR IMAGINATION AND CREATE: A’ PSYCHOSIS
OF FEAR. HE MEANS IT WHEN HE SAYS THAT HE ADMIRES LEN
RRUMAR “MADs LUMUMBA, ETC. THE DANGER IN HIS: ”

“geteeoteict “NO FOREIGN. DISSEM/CONTROLLED DISSEM .



--- Page 130 ---
14-00000

mo en) 00388 Lt

Recenved So * wwons-515/02404-67 :

Ri0/ MIS PAGE 4 OF 4 PAGES

pars ce at) oo
ED DISSEM * ee

t
|
\
|g SEsCeR-E-T NO FOREIGN oidtdl

(dissem controle]

é . REGINE LIES IN ITS DRIFT TO THE LEFT. PROFESSORS: . : ; |

. LIKE RENE PIQUION AND ULYSSES PIERRE-LOUIS, Two CLOSE 4
| DISCIPLES OF DUVALIER,ARE PREACHING TO THEIR STUDENTS -
\ A RACIST; LEFTIST, PHILOSOPHY. IT IS TINE THAT THE” ° sok

ANERICANS REALIZE THIS AND TAKE APPROPRIATE “ACTION <- °°
AGAINS? THE HAITIAN CALIGULA, 7,

4. FIELD DISSEMt STATE, ARMY, CINCLANT, CINCSO.
* CALSO SENT SANTO DOMINGO)



--- Page 131 ---
14-0000

seromeg

:

woe et “Th le
Pin: Bw ty Pence jNePical
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

Sy OR ET ‘eeiaze CITE PORT AU PRINC
_pitonry DIRECTOR INFO SANTO 0 DOMINGO, JWVAUE
orn DIRECTOR 14279- ees ee ; - .
«f-BTATION AGREES CHARLES LIFE IN Tin WENT
Be DUE HIS PLOTTING AND AMBITIONS, | BELIEVE He \x
“ouames PLACING HOPES ON AMERICAN FINANCIAL assoctates== ia
m) U.S. GOVERUMENT TO SAVE HIM IU CASE WETS “t arn | 7
“ARRESTED. | AWERICAW FLAG BOW FLYING DATLY OVER CENTRAL, on a de
* OFFICE OF COMMERCIAL, BANK.
“Qe UNFORTUNATELY RACHFIELD. CONFINED TO HOME.
“For one WEEK DUE CIRCULATORY. DISTURBANCE AND- CHUBB
WAS WO ACCESS. . WILL ARRANGE EVLEMON-@ WHO LIVES -
‘peImy CLOSE TO MAKE PERLODIC. WELGHBORHOOD “CHECK.:. .
“PAILY DRIVE-BY PAST CHARLES HOUSE REVEALED NOTHING
ABHORMAL WORKINGS 26 AND 27 JURE. fi.30 WILL ASK”
EMBASSY JUNLOR OFFICER TEWANTS OF ANOTHER CHARLES
WOUSE TO LOOK Im OW wane? f, Po ee
fa So LEDISLATIVE session artentoow 26 JUNE
ea OMMAYS baw ON *DESERTION" WHICH =
D EASILY BF: wea uv IER MAKE ARREST AND ‘SEC.
: ae, ,

24

“rom,
Cou.



--- Page 132 ---
14-0000

Metewce 1 SECRET
Page 2 Poll Sana 4517 coer ET.

Execurth guage nih coe
8 For R. ny r Tone
or on .

;

“webs eel toe

VRE TG¥is +
“ay nthe Caarenir in ee
NR ws re “Hawt


--- Page 133 ---
1400000 +

Bw
a a ee

ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET

eye

C7 secret

SUBJECT: (Optional) !
Clemurd Joseph Charles — .

George S, Musulin/js
OCS/Operational Support Staff
900 Key Building :

DCS Case 47540 (SENSITIVE) -

Ont .
2268 27 June-1967_

COMMENTS [Nomber each comment to thew from wham
§ whom, Grow @ line ccross cotume after each comment.)

wCopy of NY-556-67, ‘with
attached. letter designated for.”
Mrs,. Dorothy Matlack is Soa
forwarded for appropriate
handling, coordination , and
disposition. We are not familiar
with the contents of .Charles*
letter to Mrs, Matlack, but
would urge that all matters:
referred. to this case should be
confined to channels already.
established for this purpose to
avoid duplication and. multilateral
Communications, . cs

3. 3B 2630, figs.
8. noe :

6

ren SSTVE

' .



--- Page 134 ---
14000000

: he Sis SUT Le gts mer cams
: dooeph Charles to Mrs.

Department of Defense. mz
his letter Charles asks the Departacat’ cr Of Defenses to support hin
egainst Presicent Duvalier.

2. Hrs. Matlack esked toute A, Bran, t;. MAB Inter.
. ; _ oo sti Op. ah inter coe to her ty: "major".



--- Page 135 ---
14-0000

0 em een een ena ate ne jnrtnmstngea-ne ea bemepmenteuenee,
. a : Lo
: e

Divector “ ccate: BI-5TT-61
. { 32% 2 088 (tusulin) - Infor Kiternstion! Div. (Alyea) | — : 7



--- Page 136 ---
14-0000

TE yrpmnecnennnecnee ew enka eeareumcnte teat apins AMEND Sly negate he WEA ptf HT TR ma pa

 Loets “A. Bre a

i)

7 net y+ La al . .
oa A «Bb BoInlenmbie 6G Z .

oye -

. The following is my humble appraisal ef the polities] situation a4

now prevatling in Haiti. : : , - . . .

Asi repeatedly Stat:d.to anyone who may have asked me, my motile | a ,

vations fre purely patriotic watle I en also moved by a sinc exe desire : ; -

to éee Waiti emerge as o azmocratic independent nation friendly to the ° ” ’

_ United States. ° . . _ .
oF Since I left Haiti with my fanily ten years ago to later. become en ) t

; fooravnn eitizen, T have nade several trips to Haiti and’have maintained oY
close contocts with people in all walks of life both in Haiti! and with
those wno were forced out of the country for political reasons or other:

"wise. , . a

My latest visit to Haiti took place’ on June 5th of this year and I

(stayed two.days in Port-au-Prince. Altncugh the purpose of my trips

*. were mostly business I also hed the opportunity to discuss the Haitian

/ political situation with politicians, as well as with average Haitien
_ Citizens concerncd with the situation, Ny personal conclusions are as

follows: .. Sos oo .

he fact fs thet the ‘Dpavalior rogize is, at _ present, ine state of... &

internal politienl confusion in which no one directly or indirectly. cone >
nected with it can predict the-cutcoan. There is strong evidence ehowing -
that his son-in-law, Colonel Max Dominique, has in fact tried to overthrow

Duyalier in order to personally assume the direction of Haiti's political

affairs, Yow Davalier became eware of Colonel Dominique's intentions is 4,’

the-question everybody te trying to find the answer to. ‘Nevertheloss,

Duvalier rounded up the aliedged associntes o2 Colonel Dominique and,

efter @ wock court martial eecusing and convincing 1$ young army officers

of treason they wore ‘all killed ty a firing aquad on cune 8, 1967 at -

Fort Dimanche on the cutskirte of PorteauePrince. Duvalier himself was -

present at the slaughter and he ordered Col. Dominique to bea member of

‘the firing squad; Non-confirned information from woually rollable sources

“me 8

cheer epi tee ee AEM OS



--- Page 137 ---
14-0000

indicates that several other persons, low ranking military personnel,

militia men ané civilians were also executed or similar charges, without
fanfare.

Poa

Yt is also the general concensus of oj inion that the "purge"
will continue at a rate that. no one can yet determine. ;

%,

“ao one ignores that there has been and still are very hostile’ feelings
detween two groups within ‘the. President's family and close associates.

One is headed by Colonel Dominique and his wife Marie-Denise Duvalier,

and another is led by rs. Yvon St.Victor, the President's private se- :
erctary and confidante, The nanes of the President's wife, Simone, his“
son Jean-Claude and his younger daughter Simone, are being mentioned as ‘.
Ddeing part of the first group. In the second group, Mra. St.Victorts ©
brother, the present Head of the Department of Tourism, Me. Lue-Albert
Foucard, who is also married to one of the President's daughter, is among
éther names such as Henri Siclait, head of the Regie, Minister Lebert \.’ |
dn.Pierre, et. nentioned to be siding with Mrs. St.¥ictor. So far, the am
President has shown signs that he favers the latter group. The ‘vamifica- :

-tions of both groups extend to people who were considered the most fanatic
supporters of Duvalier hinself.

The fact is that none of the remaining
,8e-ealled strong men of Duvalier in the militias, the Tonton ‘Macoutes or

the Army know for sure how. the president feels. towards _them ond are ve: r
; euch concerned about their own future and survival. . tn ‘other ‘yoras, ° -
eonfusion and insecurity are wide spread amongat ‘Duvalier's followers... «
| Lisg-believe that in epite of the actual confusion and eenss of insecurity!
| PPevetling in governnent circles, there is no real organized opposition

4

ids euch against Duvalier at this monent, except for what I will point out!
Vater in this paper, 2 rs * Dott lek ty

F“there ts, nowever, strong anti-Duvalier + feetings | in n the middle and
* Uprer classes of Haiti, representing only.a small percentage of the wtiole
‘population, A segment of the population to be taken into very serious,
eonsideration is the one made up of the People living in the. elum breas,

BG, Qik Wd eAReen ou


--- Page 138 ---
14-0000

;
i . . . . . : ‘
\ radically leftist oriented Governzent. If allowed time, Duvalier may , -
H “. well succeed to turn the country into @ now communist satcllite and work _ '
cut some -agreements with communist countries. Here again, ‘ve should not '
vy “fal to mention the new exchange of diplomatic representations between .
7 Haiti and some commnist countries. Tne most significant one is the new i
appointment in Haiti of an Anbassador from Polend with vhon,I was told, i
Duvalier is closely working with.

| Taking everything into consideration: *

“1. The non existence of any organized opposition in Haitd;

2. The state of non cohesiveness and distrust amongst the exiled
political elements abroad, therefore mult tying any positive action. trom
outside Haiti; :

3. Tne fear of local politicians that, if outside forces were to cone °
in, their safety and security would be very much at stake, therefore they

: : should resist such intervention and do whatever is necessary to prevent
oo he eb all cost; - oo :
Mee &. The fear of Duvalier's so-called followers that they may be » eliminated,

“Upon mere suspicion, Just or unjust dengneiations; ,

3. The middle and upper classes sentiment that the U.S. is not working”
“as it ‘should to bring about the downfall, of Divalier and that the U.S. is © :
@ven supporting the regime. intentionally or unintentionally by not’ ene
/Gouraging or allowing the opposition to organize itaelf;.

- 6, The interpretation of the above classes which arc at a loss tq unders
tand the silence of the U.S. press in general for “not having raised the ~.
ususl indignation about the recent masa killings, therefore making room:
‘for the belief of a possible collusion. by means of money or otherwise of
| Duvalier with said press, particularly the New York Times, to refrain: ‘fron
bringing these facts to the attention of international public opinion; |
. 7. The Strong: ‘belief that compromises have. becn worked out with President’
7 Balaguer in the Dominican’ Scgutte to return to Hodta all opponents of ° :
“Duvalier who had fled there,

sd



--- Page 139 ---
14-0000

wee EGR ARTE RL oA OAT

TaA MAI te te

. Sos
’ . ——s

parermertnsns bein
h
--*

It would be childish, however, to formulate an opinion only on the
basis of the mentioned facts, although on the surface, they appear
Logical enough to confirm these conclusions.:

I am convenced in my own mind, ‘that when some politicians’ close to ‘
Duvalier will fcel that their lives are. in real danger, some of then
will successfully attempt to eliminate him even though they mey not be,
thexselves, in a position to control the chadtic situation that will ne-
eessarily follow. This is where the real danger is. If any such une
planried action was allowed to take place, the U.S. will then find itself
with a real “hot potato", requiring such drastic action similar to those:
takin in 1965 during the recent crieis-in the Doninicon Republic. Such \

'.” aetions are not to be desired, not only because they are costly to the ;
“- Amexgean taxpayers, but because they inevitably provoke strong anti-
fmerican feelings based on the opinion that the U.S. did nothing to help
bring about the collapse, but ie merely there to impose its choice and
- G@ecisions against the will of the people,

If the U.S, is to wait for the.
- OAS to decide on joint action in the eventuality of chaos, we are afrald

that communist influence and even control of. the Situation by forces .
based in Cuba and other countries, will make.1t mich more: difficult to. ;
(Gope with within the context of cur national security. It fe, therefore,
imperative, in our opinion,.that the U.S. take sone steps towards working -
with local politicians to take: the initiative of a coup which, when per~.
formed, would receive the. strong backing of this country, militarily,
financially and othervise, to secure an orderly succession of the present

regime. Aa far as Haiti is concerned, I feel that I have: the most adequate
elution for the proposed action.

a torr

T feel that whenever the security of
this nation or any” ‘nation is concerned, there ia no time for Walteand-6ee

“@eneiderations., In the case of Haiti, in particular, where the political.
“goene is really deprived of individuals of strong convictions, one way or.
:the other, wo feel. that the U.S. should not have eny problem in finding
“ gemeone that they can build politically and work with in a sincere and .
loyal effort to help that small nation solve some of ite perennial problens,

pee haan See CEE

A owes annie

Inve



--- Page 140 ---
14-0000

'
an
t
°

In connection with the possibility of finding a political leader, .
@s indicuted above, I must say that I have been in contact with a man
whom, I feel, could very well 1 the position. “Mis name is Clémard
Joseph Chavles, President of Ba: :@ Commerciale d'iaiti, President of. a
Haiti's Chaaber of Commerce, a u..cetor of several other ‘business ands a .
industrial organizations in Haiti. ° .

_ 2 have known Mr.‘ Charles since 1951. We have. been: friends cand .

“ business associates evarsince. To me, Mr. Charles is a true ang sincere
patriot. Of course, today, a number of people question his patriotism
on the basis of his close cooperation with the Duvalier regime. I have.

"myself; sometimes, felt that he went too far. I have.alco told him so, 77
many tinés. His answers.on such occasions have, most of the tine, satisfy, nan
my own judgement. In fact, Mr. Charles told me that, knowing Duvalier,
‘as he knows him, it would have been a question of life or death if he :

" were to behave in a different manner, What would his death serve if he
hed taken a position of non=-compromise? He feels that in order to be
edie. to control the situation and outlive Duvalier, it was better to be

i "in" ‘then “out or to put it another way to be alive than:dead... can |
that on several occasions, was it.not for Mr. Charles'. influence on
Duvalter, . this latter would have done more “harm to: the Poor pelple of.
Baits ’ “dn general, then he has done so far. :
IZ have always maintained a dialogue with Mr. Charles and “passed on w
chin’ as much as possible the Judgements of Haitians and others with vhom
had no direct contact. I must say that I have alvaye find hin reo
ceptive to their opinions, >

Everaince I have known Mr. Charles, he hes alvaye told me of nis ,

1 bitiens ‘and determination to be a. great Haitian. He asked me to ‘never

‘det him down and to stay with nim to help him carry.out his dream, Though

2 ‘haa cost me sane of my friends, I hove extended to hia. everything that -

72 gould possibly offer to help him roach his goals. . _

Unlike whe.majority of iluitien politiefans, Mr. Charles hee an-un- - -

gurmonteble faith in the future of his couditry. He féele that if Heitt, |
under ‘Duvaltor, has soneiderably regressed in every ways the time. will cone

-_ we we

omen mnt Bony



--- Page 141 ---
14-0000

: “ange enenrgngstn ct FTN A EOE SOQ ATID:
Hestags iain ging ete cayenne = pend caneys mene omen
PSEA nowonseetausenmecenins eaurmen sams wanes _ : ~ . 3

ae — = -

-T-

where, lixe a miracle, the country will acain take its course forward

_ to Join the other progressive nations of this hemisphere. Unlike those
politicians who have soen their prominent positions as a temporaty state
of affairs with absolutely no future beyond Duvalier, Mr; Charles has
practically invested in Waitt almost all the wealth that he has eccumile~ |
ted before and during Duvalier's reign through genuine: efforts and elf...
Aiecipline. Of course, I will: atait. that his wealth would not have . —
increased in its prosent proportion if it ves not for Duvalier's favors

to him. Dut who clse under the previous regimes who were in the same - . fe
position have genuinely directed thelr efforts in using their gains for 4
the betterment of the people? I have always find that Mr. Charles took ‘ '
very much satiefaction in giving employment and assistace to as ‘many
people as he possibly could. As a matter of fact this is one ‘of his
biggest assets in his present struggle. . : ne :

Mr. Charles is not a demagogue. Ie believes in the realities of the
modern world, He realizes that without the assistance of the U.S.,
progress is impossible for ‘Kaiti, He sincerely believes in the spirit.
of the Alliance for Progress. Having traveled extensively, he is fully
" Qvare of the tragic state of stagnation in. which his.country 4a in. He
“~ Qeeply wishes to see Haiti make some progress in the. fields of human
~. Gtgnity, education, technology and above all, Freedon.-

. ALL that 1 have said so'for are ay om personal opinion and also the
opinion of « large number of people in.end out of Haiti. If some defer ©
in their avaluction of Mr. Chasen, 4t fe their. privilege and undeniable.
sights, mot ane
Now, if we ‘are to take. tor granted, ny ; epintons, what does: Me. Chavlea .. .
have to offer to the.U.8, to prevent the chaos that will neceszerily
"follow: Duvalior's downfall?. First of all,-Mr. Charles is et present -

" weedy and willing to provoke the desired collapse of Duvalier'» vegine.
‘This, he accured me, he aon do without any. outside eastetence. 2 Ae.
personally aware of certain: confidential dispositions. taken by him to
aecure the success. of a coup. if and. when he decides to make it. Way does

Sea . : ween leo oe
nemo em
-_



--- Page 142 ---
14-0000

et enaeones nema vane ements smammnpernine emis Ae

i Le an) ns . i :
F . - 7 7 . ic + .

f . : ~8- . a a 7

Rot he go ahead and-make it, you may ask? His reply is that should : an ’
ho make it, what abaurances docs he have that ‘his action will satisfy °. a uot _t
the U.S,. As I stated before, Mr. Charles feele that without United
States backing, no government can possibly exist in Haiti except. undor
the very some conditions of Duvalier's Government. There would be no - °
Feason to precipitate a change ag Haiti were to romain: under a *yronicel wé
_ Qletatorship like Duvalier's..- - wos p>
What Mr. Charles is asking as a prerequisite of any ‘aetion to be -
sponsored or initiated by him is the assurance from a person of established
authority in the U.S, Government that the United States will support. the
provisional government that will necessarily have to: -asaure power after q
Duvalier, . - \ oo
‘Me dispositions taken ‘by Mr. Charles are that. e. nttivery coup by 2. * ; :
dunta will take over and stay in power until free elections are held. ‘the
: | mombers of that military junta have been already. selected by Mr. Charles, ©
who has their commitments to that effect. Mr. Charles believe that if
_ tree elections are hold he ‘should not have any great difficulty in seine
“Ate. plans and programs to the people: and therofore-ba’ e@lacted the next —
a president. of Haiti. In my opinion, Mr. Charles is noe. aaking too ‘auch. *

: : Should the United States consent to his request in” the for’ mentioned
above, I feel that the Haitian situation, long a sore rote in the U.S.
“Romiepheric relations, could be changed without risk aor ell parties
“eoncerned:

Why should the United States gamble on any other calculated risk.
waile I feel, it oan wrap up the situation safely in accord with Mr.Charies!/
plane? The military junta proposed by Mr. Charles will.be made up by high
ranking officers of the Haitian army loyal to him, therefore on the side
of the U.G. With U.S. assistance = it is almost impossible. othe:wise = the
ateps proposed by Mr. Charles after the junta will take over are. as follows:
2, Disarm the Militia and the Tonton Macoutes immediately; .
@. Reorganise the. Army and the Governient scrvices; — ,. . Pee
5. Prevant the interference of conmuniat forces made: of oxi} 18 Haitians .
based in Cube or sheavnore), . :

Tarn ey cece eee



--- Page 143 ---
14-0000

| ;

- minority will find in him a certain feeling of sceurity and can be as-

> @enominatione functioning in Haiti all the: evidence of Aho oneouragenant

4. Provent the return to the Haitian political econe of such "rabble.
rouser" so-called leaders as Daniel Fignole and Henri Vixamar;

5. Star. the ground work for free elections as soon as possible,
Mr. Charles feels that although it will probably be impossibie to pre=
vent acts of reprisals “during the first 72 hours of the miliary take,

’ ver, strong efforts should be made to avoid unnecessary: bloodshed, ©

Mr. Charhes, in my opinion, is one of the few individuals around whom
@ reconciliation of all the social’ divisions ané subdivisions of the
Haitian family can be achieved.

_ I will mention some of the basic reasons
behind this opinion: 7

1. He is of modest rural extraction, therefore is what is called in
Weiti a “son of the masses"; . :

2. He is black, therefore representing the vest najority of the’
Haitian people who, at this point, considers the light-skin Haitian as
‘a threat for the return of the domination of the mulatto minority;

3. He is deprived of the prejudice of color, therbfore tha milatto

_@ured that it will not be persecuted solely on the basis of the color ot ~
.their skins;

- be Hee wealthy, therefore credit tor hot asbition ns pover for _
‘mere personal gains; oy x :
5. He is known to ve a hard, Intelligent Andustrieliot and aéninise

* ¢rater capable of promoting and encouraging the establichnent: of new,
Dusiness and industries in Ha2ti;

6, He has shown respect for certain moral values such as the undeniable -
right of the individual to live without fear within the ) franework of the
‘Jaws of the land; :

-*%. Ke 46 o Roman Catholic. who professes to have: nothing to do with
"Voodoo" as a religion or @ cult and who has given eli the other religious

and eupport for’ their pastoral activities) |



--- Page 144 ---
14-0000

. - anybody for their past political affiliations, his efforte to be mainly
[ atrected not to solve-tho-errors of the past, ‘but to provide a better -

one.

— a of building up a better. Haiti.

-10--

8. Being a businessman in his own right, tho business community with . :
which he has dealt through the Chanber of Commerce and his bank will
alvays have a dialome with hin and therefors will find him receptive |
to their suggestions and endeavours; .

9. Having dealt with elements of the actual regime who huve his |
confidence, he will. be able to control them in a way which will avetd
unnecessary hardships should someone else = a complete stranger to then
be in a position of Government leadership; = *©

20. He is know to be strongly anti-communist and yro-Aneriesn, ‘theres 5
fore opening the door to close cooperation with the United States, under
the doctrine of the Alliance for Progress, to. promote better understanding:
and opportunities for the Haitian. people with the help of. the United. \
States;. a . \
11. He will welcome the return of all Raltien exiles to take their oe
Place anew within the Haitian commnity and to work with him to the task

of making the country e safer and better place to live; .
12. He does not contemplate any reprisals or even sanctions agatist

present and future for those vho vant to. Live in Hetti.

“Tne task, if and when he ‘succeeds to gain power, will. not be an easy”
I am sure, howaver,, that Mr, Charles will be able to find the supe
” port of enough honest and patriotic Haitians to mele him carry out his

. Charles! past affiliation with the Duvalier regine ehould not,
mento, be held ageinst him. As a matter of fact, this affiliation may

give hin the foresignt that he should de hie utnoat not bY) nepeat the same”
mistakes.

™ conclusion, I feel that the U.d, Governient,: “enrough ite quilitied -
Agencies, should give Mr. Charles! offer. to topple. the Duvalier regime, ell”
‘the required careful consideration and make: e deadaion an Lost as # poeatbles | i

Zane 20, /96 7,

= avn nserenr ee


--- Page 145 ---
14-0p000 +

SO wae = UO he RS
- on as
units OS ’
wn 5995 a
; oar, 24 Sune 1967 7
, CABLE SECRETANAT DISEEMINATION .
- . \ mo . '
, w— ftom —__« noo?
CONF: > . eo
. i eee C1; See
-‘ we Uport au PRINCE INFO: SANTO DOMINGO JEWAVE
| REF: PORT AU PRINCE 48¢0 CIN 97336)¢ ,
; "a, APPRECIATE ‘REF REPORT ON CLENARD JOSEPH CHARLES, THIS ; :

AGAINST THE DUVALIER REGIMES can YOU CONFER “gus?

COMMENT CHARLES: HAS BEEK PLACED UNDER HOUBE ARREST AND ALL
. PROPERTY TAKEN AWAY FROM HIM.



--- Page 146 ---
14-00000

free Rete!

To

TO
To
TO

S chassiey to riLe wo.
BREF TO FUE AO. W.

euc ato Caer. v0 [enancw T ]

eestaoy () s10.

QU 7PM 6-23-67 MLT

. TO.

10
". FROM DIRECTOR FBI ; a
- CONFIDENTIAL ~ FOREIGN POLITICAL MATTERS = ‘want:

- WHO RAS FURNISHED RELIABLE INFORMATION. IN, THE PAST ADVISED THAT -

"WE WAD LEARNED THE FOLLOWING CONCERNING CURRENT DEVELOPMENTS WITHIN |
OMARTEA we Oe

AND FINANCLAL ADVISOR TO PRESIDENT FRANCOIS DUVALIER, UPON LEAVING ©

“@ HOSPITAL IN PORT-AU~ “PRINCE, HAITI, AFTER HAVING, HAD A TONSILL~

_ReTony PERFORMED WAS: ARRESTED BY DUVALIER HENCHMEN OW UNE
WENTYONE, AND IMMEDIATELY INCARCERATED. IN au UnKHOWR LOCATION

Gree MERE IEEE ERO IRM TERM ET

A ce orn ~ “ ; >
i
i
{
1
i
\

ese et nea, TREE REET LO,

whe’ —

iwifiars -

adv, cory

ened Serene ey & gts

aay

THE PRESIDENT 88
SECRETARY OF STATE 68

DIRECTOR CIA 93. a
DIRECTOR nuke. INTELLIGENCE AGENCY. cs -
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY 02°

DEPARTMENT OF THE AIR FORCE ae ,

2B yu o acca
ow. UNE. ‘Twenty. THREE, NINETEEN “BINTYSEVEH,, A CONFIDENTIAL SOURCE

i .

JOSEPH CLEMARD CHARLES, PRESLDEMT oF. THE COMMERCIAL BANK or watts

aa Deb sep

to amgemerececnprenee mareemenmaneen eerie maton COA rane: Moet

—_


--- Page 147 ---
14-0000

IN PORT-AU-PRINCL BY. HIS CAPTORS, CHARLES" BANK ACCOUNTS AND

|
| FINANCIAL HOLDINGS HAVE BELN SEIZED BY DUVALIER. CHARLES * LIFE
}

TS IN IMMINENT DANGER AND IT 1S PROBABLE THAT CHARLES WILL BE
“KILLED BeCAUSE OFTHE ALLEGED OPPOSITION WHICH HE HAS ORGANIZED ©
AGAINST THE DUVALIER REGIME,
- “THE SOURCE STATED. THAT TRE SITUATION w HAITI HAS DETERIORATED
GREATLY DURING. THE PAST MONTH. AND ‘SAID THAT HE” FELT THAT THIS
" SITUATIGN IS THE WORST IT HAS BEEN IN THE LAST YEAR.


--- Page 148 ---
1400000

Bubjeots Report from George Musulin

' arrest as of 21 June, He cannot leave the country, | “ALL of hia propertics

‘ a

SECREL Be

t
i
. - _?
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD ot ; _ Me 4
q

"a. George Nosilin, } Washington 103 representatives, ealled thie afternoon

to advise the followings

ae Dorothy Matleck (Dept. of army Q=2) has, now. bes out cut
of the contact between the-Dcs and He. B An New Yorks. Presume that Meo +
B refers to Luis Brun, the New York lawyer and representative of Clemard

me Joseph Charles. : : : . ot . ee = : 7

db. Me. CG. (Clemard Joseph Charen) me ‘been placed under house

end possessions have been taken from hin. The only thing Chriles has left te
tis interest in the Commercial Bank. The situation dn Heitd is believed a :
ve deteriorating very rapidly. (Notes Musulin or Brun ‘apparently have no

; ‘emplamaticn as to how Charles managed tor etati hte’ ‘banking! interent after

-Waaineena interest in the. ‘etty, Apparently the place trew-Looke Like a ghost

tor etter dark, AOGordingly be has tssued ‘tavteestivews orders that
stares etay open fror, Gol2-t the morning and Unf: in the evenings.

WALL adviee when more info avaiLable,, Musulin believes that Duvalier
placed ‘Charles under arrest bscause he got wind of his Proponed conspiracy,
Re does not know where the leak soouireds


--- Page 149 ---
14-0000

i
:

. : . 7 : a : m 06)

Ciescm ey

. INTEL a :
- SUPDATA PARA 1 EVLEMON-2 FROM EVLEMON-6 FROM COLONEL

MIS RRR cen

irP-1067
#-TOCSOB-315/02303-67

ROUTING aAND/ Or
INITIALS - SEEN BY

7 cote fa . :
. woh : . .

(mpex, : vas ifuo we. EN haulers) . .
Chassine To rue me. & -% 2 ~

Mendy TO FILE WO.
ruc aw Caer. to

cestnoy (si,

WOT’ FICATION To . 1
aov. copy” 1
(}'ssuco (7) srorves ev:

action

SECRET 231 o 13406297136 .

i
DIRECTOR INFO PANAMA CITY, REP/LANT, SANTO DOMINGO, JNWAVE mo |
f

QRacla waceS = Gg
” PARA 2 EVLEMON~6 ¢

FIELD COMMEND FROM OBSERVATION AND TALK FRANCIS.
D. RACHFIELD.HAD.WITH CHARLES, os

2317262

Secret...



--- Page 150 ---
14-0000

“COUNTRY HAITI

SUBJECT CLEMARD JOSEPH: CHARLES, PRESIDENT: OF THE.

. SOURCE A FORMER HAITIAN GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEE wo HAS THE.-

“COWITHOHIM. NE IS PUBLICLY CAMPAIGNING FOR THE PRESIDENCY -
“secret NO FOREIGN DISSEM / “CONTROLLED DISSEM. ”

a eens ney arate mnie Manage mene me na smn HT AALS FO A aan sa

Toa SE 7

|
“ CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY @ ROUTINE i
i
‘

; Intelligence Information Cable % °7* :

_ PAGE 1 OF 3 PAGES i
mamerteasuRy nucerear (SECOEr ins _ any bie 9 AIR} = GIA/NMCG ws NSA a] / sou" = ; .

Bere aces etme tbe, Raionsl Defense of the, x SPS SR ea zo Laws, Title: 18, 0.2.0." '

NO ‘FOREIGN OISSEM / CONTROLLED DISSEM . : 1

;

SECRET ae CITE” TOCSpB~315/02303-67 ;

: ‘

© 2 DIST 23 VINE 1967
DOI 22 JUNE 1967

COMMERCIAL BANK

aca - ‘ 234UNE 1967, © PORT AU “PRINCE HAITI, 2 MEP*1667 - |

CONFIDENCE OF MANY MEMBERS OF THE DUVALIER -
“GOVERNMENT... His REPORTING HAS BEEN ACCURATE’ S
“SINCE 1963. "ME RECELVED INFORMATION FROM

“A HAITIAN MILITARY OFFICER WHO IS ANTI-DUVALIER
BUT WHO HAS CONFIDENTIAL ACCESS TO KEY MEMBERS”
“OF THE DUVALIER ENTOURAGE AND HAS BEEN
PROVED TO BE ACCURATE IN THE INFORMAT LOW HE

«fe CLEMARD. JOSEPH CHARLES, PRESIDENT oF THE. COMMERCIAL
Bank, KAS ‘CAUSED PRESIDENT “FRANCOIS DUVAL IER TO BE ANGRY =



--- Page 151 ---
14-0000

97136
WES DB-/315/02303-67

PAGE 2 OF 3 PAGES

‘
i

o- a te

i
“SECRET NO FOREIGN OISSEM / CONTROLLED DISSEM :
i

TO SUCCEED DUVALIER. WHILE IN THE GENERAL HOSPITAL
| FOR A THROAT OPERATION DURING THE WEEK OF 12 JURE 1967 ee =
CHARLES MAINTAINED @ REGISTER IN WHICH ALL THOSE WHO. oo oe toe
oh CAME TO SEE MIM COULD SIGN THEIR NAMES, DUVALIER Now aS a ce
“| RWOWS THAT CHARLES IS ANB IT TOUS AND LACKING IN GRATITUDE, =
FOR WITHOUT DUVALIEP HE WOULD BE NOTHING. BUT CHARLES
WILL FEEL DUVALIER'S WRATH. ALL HIS PROPERTY..WILL BE-
" CTAMEN AWAY FROM HIM AND HE WILL BE KEPT UNDER HOUSE ARREST.
2. WHILE CHARLES WaS IN THE HOSPITAL HIS BUSINESS .
"VENTURES WERE SEIZED BY: THE TAX OFFICE AND PLACED UNDER
TRE CONTROL OF TWO TAX INSPECTORS, SERGE SALOMON AND
ame LAFONTANT.

,

FIELD: COMMENT: CHARLES RETURNED TO. urs HOME OW
“1 “ayNe 1967 AND WILL REMAIN THERE FOR “AT LEAST PIFTERW
': PAYS UNDER DOCTORS ORDERS TO RECUPERATE. HIS HOUSE Ts
MOT UNDER GUARD NOR UNDER VISIBLE SURVEILLANCE.
CHARLES CLAIMS TO BE CONTINUING TO PLOT THE OVERTHROW oF
F DUVALIER WHOM HE: CONSIDERS INSANE AND WILL. NOT SEEK.
FOREIGN DISSEM / CONTROLLED DISSEM



--- Page 152 ---
14-0000

rots 08-315/02303-67: a

4 ; : ‘
. . . /. PAGE 3 OF 3PAGES a ee j
SECRET NO FOREIGN DISSEM / CONTROLLED DISSEM ne i a

> ASYLUM DESPITE FACT ‘ME HAS LOST MOST OF HIS BUSINESS
Is
. VENTURES, GHARLES/ STIL DIRECTOR OF THE COMMERCY aL
_ BANK. waroUNow CONTROLLED BY/LiNAMED. ANVEST MENT

CORPORTAT ION IN NEW. YORK CITY TO-PREVENT ITS SEIZURE -

BY/HALT IAN GOVERNMENT.
4. FIELD DISSEM: STATE, ARMY,. CINCLANT , ctneso

caso SENT SANTO DOMINGO) — ae,

oS REPORT CLASS SECRET/NO FOREIGN DISSEM/CONTROLLED DISSEM.



--- Page 153 ---
14-0000

SNE ee eer. ween

a” “> Bob,
| Mr, Musulin (Do);. extention 2268, called to Bay that Dorothy
‘Matlack had called to inform hin that she had reached wr. BO
Would pass into for Matlack

and that per instructions kr. B.
ur. Musulin- Said that” from his

-. <5
to Balog in New york.
conversation with her he believed that Watlack wanted to be

eut in on this activity and wanted to receive, sopies ot any.

es oe iesoninations. .
Mr. Musulin mentioned that tur. B had tera Uatlack that he

had heard that the operation - (tonsillectony) was performed.

on Charles and he is feeling fine.



--- Page 154 ---
14-0000

q
iN

DATE: . 20 JUNE 1967 ° . : . pista i i
, ‘REASSIFICATION: CONFIDENTIAL = oe :
. : a SUBJECT: JOSEPH CLEMARD CIANLES ue :
a Baca ey FBI FILE NO: NONE GIVEN: (NEW YORK) -

DATE: 21 JUNE 1967 (cross reference sheet)
paB BOI? ;

re
t



--- Page 155 ---
14-0000

cette cate ane tenement ante EE TE

-

~

(SreRe TOSENSITIVE 1918407 crTE  CORTACTS/NEW Yor® wets.
os OONTACTS/ASHINATAN Sm Fos

OPERATIONAL SUPPORT STAFF crust Fos HCCONNELL Frow BALOG
: SUBJECT CASE a7s4an

o =ON ra. SINE 67 LOUTS Ag: RR BRIN, PoRSIPENT, Bee INTERNATIONAL .
CORP. NEW YORK © erty, Sav IN WASHINGTON COLONEL CHOWARB) BNPRTS. THEY
TSCUSSED ° IN PRIVATE THE CURRENT DEVELOPMENTS IW NAITI.

Be COLOWEL . BURRIS, - ‘WHO THINKS. VERY HIGHLY or CLEMARD JOSEPR »
CHARLES, TOLD BRYN THAT HE FULLY SUPPORTS Tie HarTran BANKER’ S
PLANS. AND THAT ME VILL ste PRESIDENT JOHNSON as SOON’ as. POSSTSLE,

V SURRIS TOLD BRUN THAT KE WILL: WRGE THE PRESIDENT. TO CONSIDER
IVING tis QOVERNWENT HELP TO CHARLES,
ORE TWSENSETIVE |



--- Page 156 ---
14-0000

' CHARLES was ables. in 1960, to create the Commercial fank of Haiti, o

. made a trip to a USAF base in Arizona to effect: purchase, which was ~. -

- later blocked. After long, close assoctation with DUVALE

- . whieh CHARLES had: become extremely. wealthy» he managed to: incur
- DUVALIER's displeasure. Craduslly. CHARLES

mo began to realize that he no longer enjoyed DUVALIER's favor, he
To beeen for the second or third time, to seek. charmele to the:

; "the President.-

". approaches has been wade to DCS/New York, which he believes lesda him. wen
_ to the Department of Defense. Never has this .

. anyone Listen to him, it would simply mean: chat ¢!
‘ef Marines, State hepartnent » Haiti Desk, has. pecae consider

LS June 1967 _
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

SUBJECT s Clemard Joseph CHARLES (2012357029)

1. ‘poppetquad: Clemard Joseph CHARLES, “born Gonaives, nates,
21 April » 19 @ Negro of peasant origin. ‘CHARLES is a shrewd,

opportunistic, basically dishonest individual whose natural talents
have been channelled to President DUVALIER's advantage over a period
of ten years. ‘tlavine made considerable money in the banana business

which he is stiil the sole owner... Since its beginning, the Bank has ‘been
an instrument for DUVALIER's financial manipulations, and CHARLES :
is a subservient agent: for the President in many of the latter's :
clandestine operations conceived to evade U. S. Government. surveillance.
CHARLES, for example, was DUVALIER's agent in the operation designed |
to smuggle surplus U. S. military aircraft to Haiti: and, in fact, -.

ER, during  _.
influence diminished in’. |
favor of Henri SICLAIT, Director of the Regie de-Tabac. As CHARLES -

rnment and to solicit support for hinself as a ‘succassor to

koe

2. faanas Contact cla contact with CHARLES in: ‘the: U.S. dates *
back to May when he was visited in. his suite in the Hotel Willard
in in vashington ‘by a representative of WH Division. ;Since that aay

he hae made his every. visit to the-U.S. an “occasion to tatk.to some:

official of the U. S, Government. The most persistent. of hie

crupulous , overly
ewbitious charletan offered.any evidence that is anyt hing goin
for hia inside ‘Haiti, The names he hae furnis! as: fe ‘ellags .
collaborators have. meant little or nothing. -His: epprosch to a- Station. ~ fh
vepresentative in forteau-Prince in January: 1967" produced: ‘nothing in |.
the way of hard information. His reports, passed to DCS/NY through
his business representative in New York, have been. evasive and, in-seme-
inetences, utterly felee. Febrication, has. in. sone been. obvious.

_ 3. in brief, CHARLES 4s trying ‘to- coerce. the We S.° Government | :
Anto some. sort of cupport. for his presidential aspirations. Should: - .
fev. S. would have.
te take over the entire operetion and move him in behind a red nia | >
t higherepleced: buyers: beware!” - : i ;

highly undesirable.

Re. T, rR.

-SecneT

¢



--- Page 157 ---
14-0000

pve alecnnen rea eB tM Jet

em)

si eT

»

15 June 1967

MEMORANDUM FOR: c/w? ne
SUBJECT: © Clemard Joueph CHARLES

1. At 1500. hours, the DCS representative, George
Musulén, informed the Haiti Desk that’ Mr.. BRUN, Lawyer
for Clemard Joseph CHARLES, had met COLONEL HOWARD L. . \..
BURRIS on 14 June and hed passed the “word” to him
' plus allegedly the two letters from CHARLES, - BURRIS ;
ured BRUN that his plea would be teken to the
White House level. . Loe ‘ ~

. 2,. DES will keep Raitt Desk informed « of further
" davelopente, . , ta te

ee



--- Page 158 ---
1400000,

Msoh Roy 205 epee ie RDC Rhema omen wre

- ° e

4

15 June 1967. . ;

. : . ; ’

oe . MEMORANDUM FOR: C/WHD' .
SUBJECT; . | Clemard Joseph CHARLES.

1, At 1530 hours, the Dcs representative, George ‘ . (

Musulin, called WaT fat, Desk to. report the following:

. HOWARD L. BURRIS in Washington, De C.. “ghey -

discussed in private. the current developments in

“Haiti. Colonel BURRIS, who thinks very highly of
CLEMARD JOSEPH CHARRLES, told BRUN that: he fully
fupports the banker 'ACHARLES) plans’ and that he
will see the President as Soon as possible.
7 ‘BORRIS" told BRUN that he will urge ‘the: President:

i
i
t
}
|
f
i
i
|
"on 14 June 1967, Mr. BRON met Colone} . _— a = ‘ke

‘to consider giving Uv. 8. Governzent ‘support to
CHARLES."
a.

-No other Anformation available. .

oan


--- Page 159 ---
14-0000

VERE oer Cueto periment et te ny ce En ET IORE TSS tha uth, TEESE Gn eens ee vipn nate tame ae

15 June 1967 oo E.

MEMORANDUME —_ re
SUBJECT y Clemard Joseph CHARLES -— :

" REPSt Attached two teletypes frou Des New York City -

1. At L1ES hours, 15 June, Dorothy. MATLACK, ° “Department of the
ar + called the DCS Washington representative, George MUSULIN,
nform that she had just, received a phone call ‘from Louis BRUN,. s
: President ; 3 & B International, NYC, requesting an “audience”. “Fh
- MATLACK coatacted DCS for advice. Allegedly, BRUN wants to pasa
the two letters from Haitian Banker CLEMARD JOSEPH CHARLES to ~~. *
" MATIACK. DCS called the Haitian Desk for advice to, formlste a :
reply to MATIACK. .. --:..

“py oo. 2, ‘WH/7/Hasts has: identified the two Anerican: -econtacts. mentioned
, . 4m references as follows: :

i
i
; ee DOROTHY MATLACK: Enployed in the. “Oftice of the
: Assistant “chief of Staff, ‘G-2, U.S. Army. Hes been a. ot

rticipant on the Interagency Defector Committee and has |
: Been issued an Agency badge. Both TSD and OCR have shown _ ae
- interest in her. . : b

: b. COLONEL HOWARD LAY: BURRIS: “Born texas, 1918,,
duate of U. S. Military Academy. Believed to be retired-
Fron: ‘the USAF... His name, along with Pierre SALINGER, etc.

' was included'on a list from the Office of the Vice President _
_- PSequesting an SI clesrance, 10 February . 1961... Gonsidered: to
. _}e @ Texas millionaire. . ;

a euggested that MATLACK inform BRUN to. contact ;

; - Mager "nALed ¢ representative, New York City) with whom BRUN has”
” Been ia wp and. pase the letters to him. Final decision -
reste 7



--- Page 160 ---
14-0000

tansy ASSIFICATION.
oF .
“TDCS. INFONMATION REPORT y |
one, B, E, BACKMAN ROUTING :

ONT WHY T/HALTE
oa (2.3 iS

4222
ATE ea JUNE JUNE 191 t;
SRETRNG

be -

TDCS ps-315/02061-67

wave0d 4, cr/ic, s/s, FI, FI/D, FI/INT 6, IW, ca/o 4, CA/PEG, CA 3, |
Ww -

xO FOREIGN DISSEA/ CONTROLLED, DIseEM

wT FOR RELAY TO’ PANAMA CITY; “REP/LANT, PORT AU’ PRINCE, SANTO DO- |
"magus , kxco, : ‘AND auMAvE is op

vow meee -

Basic ‘DOCUMENT HAS NOT DEEN MADE AVAILABLE TO THE DCI,

GS ive USE ONE

” G/WE/?/Hait
_C/WH/7/R of

‘SECRET FA

SHIN idea ony

feu SSMOLETE PREVIOUS 1917100) a oS te



--- Page 161 ---
14-0000

ce Yaat intettionnce AGENG, .. - © ROUTINE |

Intelligence Information Cable © mw.

oe nes unm ateneinSine pen

‘NO FOREIGN L_DISSEM/CONTROLLED -DISSEM

: : * CHE, “WWCS DN~: =6 5
—S=ECC-R-E-T - rr bn 313/02061 7

ost 18 ‘JUNE (1967 | oe

a rage 1 OF 7 paaes - .
e QTATE/INR BIA ARMY NAVY AIR JC® SECDEF NGA NIC AIO USIA “GDO ONE OCR ORR DCB cas CIA/NMCG ‘
H ; FBY__T&N5 fe,
- a " = —— $ '
; $ Bee tee stains information ‘wmosting the Netlona! Detonse of the Unites Staten within the 7 esata of the commbaiad Laws, Titte 18, vsa, ad
i .
+4

‘g

COUNTRY HAITI . e
boi 9 JUNE: 1967, - . -
sUUECT 1, CONTINUING . BIDS’ BY CLEMARD, _SOSEPH CHARLES “FOR. vu 18. GOVERNMENT “
ee SUPPORT FOR HIS: PLOT TO OvERTHRGW THE HAITIAN coven ; .
S. CIVILIAN SUPPORTERS IN HAITI oe
aca. 8 JUNE 1967 oe : oo
sourct FOREIGN BUSINESSMAN WITH WIDE CONTACTS IN PORT-AU-PRINCE wiio 18: °° an
‘BELIEVED TO REPORT ACCURATELY WHAT HE LEARNS,” ‘TaIs INFORMATION, 7 1 “

WAS OBTAINED FROM A CLOSE FRIEND OF CHARLES an “TE ‘CLOSE, FRUEND “

AND CHARLES WERE AWARE THAT THE INFORMATION WOULD REACH :
Man GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS, ©

" (GUMMARY: CLEMARD: JOSEPH’ CHARLES,” PRESIDENT. oF THE COWMERCTAL,

BANK OF HAITI, AGAIN: 18 PLANNING TO BEEK U.S. GOVERNMENT SUPPORT FOR

_ RIG PLOT T0-OVERTHRO® THE HAITIAN GOVERNENT, ACCORDING TO CHARES, *

HE NOW HAS 290 SOLDIERS (OFFICERS AND MEN). WHO ARE® READY. TO STRIKE -
oat ANY TIME AND KILL PRESIDENT FRANCOIS DUVALIER; - AND HE HAS . NAMED:
+ oan OF HIS SUPPORTERS AND “FELLOW CONSPIRATORS" ‘THROUGHOUT HAITI,

- GHARLES SAID THAT HE AND HIS ARMY FRIENDS WILL cnr. 1D OF DOVALIER,.



--- Page 162 ---
14-0000

n sO IN ;

I _ YesDB-315/02061-67

} - . . .
. : : ; - PAGE 2 OF 7 PAGES :

¢ 8=B-C-R-E-T/NO FOREIGN DISSEN/CONTROLLED DISSEM
emmnfSlessicaLon aa (dterene state

a a

ee me

BUT THEY ARE NOT STRONG ENOUGH WITHOUT FOREIGN HELP TO STAY NN.

\
i
| POWER, -.HE WARNED THAT IF U.S. GOVERNMENT HELP IS NOT FORTHCOMING,
| TRE CASTROITE HAITIANS HAVE A. VERY GOOD CHANCE OF SEIZING POWFR,)
| 2. (HEADQUARTERS COMMENT: THE ‘FOLLOWING ASSESSMENT OF
“|. + QREMARD JOSEPH CHARLES HAS BREN DRAWN FROM INFORMATION FROM
| - VARIOUS RELIABLE SOURCES: SINCE ABOUT 1963, CHARLES HAS: ‘TRIED
TO GAIN U.S, GOVERNMENT SUPPORT FOR HIMSELF AS THE SUCCESSOR.
. [© PRESIDENT DUVALIER; HE HAS THE REPUTATION OF BEING AN
OPPORTUNIST, SHREWD, CAPABLE, AND UNSCRUPULOUS, AND HAS DUVALIER'S
_ CONFIDENCE WHICH HE HAS USED TO FURTHER HIS. OWN EFFORTS AGAINST
DUVALIER, THE INFORMATION WHICH FOLLOWS APPEARS TO BE NOTHING
MORE” THAN AN EXTENSION OF CHARLES' ATTEMPTS ‘TO PANIC THE U.S;
 QOVERNVENT AND THEREBY GAIN THR SUPPORT OF THE U.S, GOVERNMENT
©” WHICH MAY CONSIDER CHARLES AS. THE LESSER, OF A NUMBER OF EVILS,,
[MIS ALLEGED SUPPORTERS, LISTED BELOW, ARE BELIEVED TORR
“YNBIGNIFICANT AND HIS. ALLEGED ARKY. SUPPORTERS “ARE. SUSPECT; ~_
i GHARLES’ REFERENCE TO PIDEL CASTRO AND DOMINICAN PRESIDENT
-SOAQUIN BALAGUER’ AS: HIS COMPETITORS .IN A, RACE TO OVERTHROY
“DUVALTER ‘TG CONSIDERED: TO BE WITHOUT BASIS. A CALCULATION BY
~ CHARLES TO FORCE THE U.8, GOVERNMENT! 8 HAND ™ HIS FAVOR, .

GeB-C-R-R-T/NO FOREIGN " DESSEM/ CONTROLLED ) ptssen


--- Page 163 ---
14-00000

a? aa
)

mm, _ TCs: DB-315/02061-67
; PAGE 3 OF 7 PAGES

_ FOR OTHER RECENT REPORTING ON CHARLES' PLANS TO OVERTHROW ‘DUVALIER, ©

SEE TDCSDB-315/01965-67, CSDB-312/0i428-67, “AND cspp-312/01625-67.) » :

"3, CLEMARD JOSEPH CHARLES, PRESIDENT OF THE COMMERCIAL BAK | tC”

OF HAITI, WHO IS PLOTTING TO OVERTHROW THE HAITIAN GOVERNMENT,
"38 TO UNDERGO A MINOR. THROAT OPERATION ON 14 JUNE 1967 IN

ana

PORT-AU=PRINCE; CHARLES. WANTED TO HAVE THE OPERATION INTHE - |
U,S., BUT DUVALTER ““STRONGLY SUGGESTED" ‘THAT IT BE DONE LOCALLY, y

2 ae. CHARLES,’ wo Is. INCREASINGLY FEARFUL THAT DUVALIER WILL
BECOME ‘AWARE OF HIS PLOT AND WILL ELIMINATE" RIM, AGAIN PLANS

TO ‘BEEK ‘U.S, GOVERNMENT SUPPORT,

HE DESCRIBED THE CONDITIONS IN
. HAITI AS NEAR CHAOTIC AND REITERATED . THE NEED TO GET RID oF

> DUVALIER, HE SAID: THAT HE NOW HAS 250 SOLDIERS: (OFFICERS AND MEN)
_ WHO ARE READY TO STRIKE AT “ANY TIME AND KILL DUVALIER; _ CHARLES

SAID THAT HE AXD. HIS “HIGH-RANKING ARMY OFFICER FRIEND" FEEL. THEY :
RAVE RNOUGH AMMUNITION AT -TREIR COMMAND TO HOLD OUT FOR 24 FOURS, ok

cece e ee cine wees nargemepuineainydnannsnte se en tH CREATE



--- Page 164 ---
14-0000

Hy
7 j
iN }
: : H
4 ToCs DB-315/02061-67 i
PAGE 4 OF 7 PAGES

e 8-E-C-R-E-T/NO FOREIGN DISSEM/CONTROLLED DISSEM , 24, '

+ '
154 flea! (as controls, . :

emenaisoen ‘ cei

“ CSDB-312/01625~67,) HOWEVER, AFTER 24 HOURS, THEY DEFINITELY _
WOULD NEEP.U.S, HELP AGAINST THE FOLLOWING THREE POSSIBILITIES: .- — | _
A, COUNTERACTION BY FANATICAL DUVALIER FOLLOWERS | ssi
- B, AN INVASION ATTEMPT BY CUBAN-TRAINED HAITIAN EXILES -
_€, DOMINICAN’ PRESIDENT JOAQUIN BALAGUER'S ACTION TO] |
“SUPPORT THE DUVALIER FOLLOWERS SO THAT CHARLES AND RIS © | >
MILITARY JUNTA WOULD NOT BE ABLE TO TURN HAITI INTO A

| STAGING AREA FOR DOMINICAN. ANTI-GOVERNMENT: EXILES,

|B. CHARLES NAMED THE FOLLOWING AS SOME OF HIS CIVILIAN -

” SUPPORTERS AND "FELLOW CONSPIRATORS" THROUGHOUT HAITI:
- A, IM PORT-AU-PRINCE

“ @). svuvester JEAN-BAPTISTE, “A TANNER.

_(@) PEERRE GABRIEL, A MERCHANT |

“@) 6, PAINSON, A BUSINESSMAN ©.”

(4) BUGENE PAUL, A MERCHANT 0"

(6). WALLACE B, TURNBULL, & PROTESTANT CLERGYMAN

—(@) JOSEPH VoLcY, AN INFLURSTIAL BUSINESSMAN. IN

im ANDRE aus, “POPULAR LEADER". w BEL-AZR SECTION
8) JOSEPH RAYMOND, 1" MORNE. A TUF SECTION

6
or
or
: 8
an
®

BeB=C=R-2-T/NO yoREray ‘DISSE. /CONTROLLED DISSEM °


--- Page 165 ---
14-0000

c 3 _
; . Ma a “ *" qesDB-315/02061-67
: , , PAGE § OFT PAGES : '
- ol ‘
.¢ S+E-C-R-E-~T/NO FOREIGN DISSEM/CONTROLLED DISSEM i ,
q felassification) e : ’
.. * (@) . PIERRE JEAN-BAPTISTE, IN CARREFOUR SECTION . -{ . ;
B,. TRADE UNION LEADERS . ; oy
(1) JACQUES ST, LOT ww ty i
(2), ACHILLE LA ROSE wae °
| (3) - JEAN BERNARD: ae ,

(4) LELIO JOSEPH -
' @, CATHOLIC CLERGYMEN LG _
* (2) ROGER AUGUSTINE, OF CATHOLEC RELIEF “~~

(2); MSGR, PETER CAYES vn
: (3) MSGR, CONSTANT (FNU), OF GONAIVES.
. (4) FATHER HILAIRE (FNU), WHOSE BROTHER, AN ARMY °
. OFFICER, WAS. FIRED BY DUVALIER

(8) FATHER DELVA CHD, (OF THE GENERAL HOSPITAL
IN PORT-AU-PRINCE

-, (8) BROTHER VICTOR, OF ‘THE SJEAN-MARIE, GUILLOUX--
BCHOOL: IN PORT=AU-PRINCE _

AD, _ BROTHER RICHARD

BYRIAN BUSINESSMEN IN PORT-AU-PRINCE,
Fay “ NAGIB HANDAL =
Ce NASTRI AND ELIAS BABOUN

BaE-CoR-E=T/NO FOREIGN’ sana ctrrccaen _DISSEM:


--- Page 166 ---
14-0000

a NN... : on,

cee - "apes DB-315/02061-67 pons

re oo 2 , page 6 OF 7 PAGES _ |: _

; : : 7 i a4 ;

« S-E-C-R-E-T/NO FOREIGN DISSEN/CONTROLLED DISSEM aA

mc) THE ACRA BROTHERS) oy oo!
4) Fouap ‘MOURU re

ITALIAN’ BUSINESSMEN IN PORT-AU-PRINCE
(1). THE PETOIA: FAMILY .: ee
- (2) THE MAGLIO FAMILY : - Bf Bats
|. OTHERS - oo ae te

~ Q)_ FRANK PEURIES,, A BUSINESSMAN” IN. CORATL ~
“(8) ALPHONSE BAZIL, A LAWYER IN: JEREMIE

(8) JEAN, BOURGEOIS, A BUSINESSMAN IN CAYES
w MIDOUIN. TURNIER,, A BUSINESSMAN. IN JACMEL
(8). LEON ST, REMY, A BUSINESSMAN IN GONAIVES
(6) CLAUDE FORBIN, A BUSINESSMAN IN GONAIVES —
1) SERGE HARLIEN, A BUSINESSMAN IN CAP HAITIEN
FELIX ANGELOUSE, A BUSINESSMAN IN CAP HAITIEN
" CHARITE JEAN,. A BUSINESS LEADER IN. PLATSANCE
“(10) MARC BELOT, A LAWYER AN PETITE RIVIERE OR
~L! ARTIBONITE: cou,
G2) rca , FEGUIRE, A BUSINESSUAK IN PETIT TROU

a
1 a
e eBe0-2-2=2/ NO FOREIGN “DISSEM/ CONTROLLED: DISSEM oa


--- Page 167 ---
14-00000

_ Pe ‘B, MAX CHAUVET, PUBLISHER OF LE NOUVELLETTR,

‘ . io

. 10C$ DB-315/02061-67
PAGE 7 OF 7 PAGES :

6. CHARLES CLAIMS THAT THE FOLLOWERS OF THE LATE CLEMENT ©
JUMELLE, A PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE IN 1957, ARE AMONG HIS - :
SUPPORTERS, AS WELL AS THE FOLLOWING INFLUENTIAL NEWSPAPERMEN:

A. DUMERIC CFNU), PRESIDENT OF PUBLISHERS | ASSOCIATION,

HE ALSO COUNTS ON THE SUPPORT OF A NUMBER OF PERSONS WHO ARE

STUDYING IN WEST GERMANY, SPAIN, AND OTHER COUNTRIES ON SCHOLAR=
SHIPS WHICH ‘HE GAVE THEM, ,

%.

"CHARLES, “THROUGH HIS AGENTS, | ALSO HAS GooD CONNECTIONS

-_ wrra WITCH DOCTORS AND "PERSONALITIES IN THE vooD00 ‘MOVEMENT, "
7 8.

3

_ ALTHOUGH CHARLES GAVE NO DATE FOR THE. ACTION, HE SAID
_ THAT HE-AND HIS ARMY FRIENDS WILL GET RID OF DUVALIER, BUT THAT ©:
“MEY ARE New. STRONG ENOUGH WITHOUT.FOREIGN HELP TO STAY-IN POWER, |
"MB WARNED THAT. IF’ THE U.S, GOVERNMENT REFUSES TO HELP THEM, THR».
"" CASTROITE HAITIANS HAVE A VERY GOOD CHANCE OF SEIZING POWER, > _

FIELD DISSEM:.. CINCSO, .CINCLANT (ALSO SENT PORT AU PRINCE)

6
40°
8.
| ie
i
e

; B-BeC-R-E=1/NO FOREIGN DISSEM/CONTROLLED DISSEM

» 8-E-C-R-E-T/NO FOREIGN DISSEM/CONTROLLED DISSEM _

a i
po te
WHO WRITES FOR LE MATIN, sy bao ts



--- Page 168 ---
14-0000,

MEMORANDUM FoR:
FROM... : Reaneth T. Ripley -
_ BUb CT > Asscsanent of Cleuara sosemn-coarles, .

_. dmterests.’ (Bs played a principal role in the atteupt to

, to min for pineclt support as the lesser :o!. ae aunber ef

~ SECRET

12 June 1907.

Clenara Joveph-Cnrles, president of: the ‘Commercial
Bank of Haiti and President of the ‘Haitian chanber of.
Connerce, is the source...

For four years. ‘cuaries’ bas tried to gain v.8. “8
support for. hinsel? as Successor to Precident Duvalier.

Be if an opportunist of the ‘gtret water-shrevwd,.
capable and unverupulow. He hes played. Duvelier's : ,
game to the hilt, ozten entrusted. with missions abroad -.
Which were, @ effect contrary to U.S. governzent.

Guuggle B-26 aircraft out of the U.S. for Duvalier’s uss. «
In thot connection he wont te Arizona to try to purchase —
U.8..air Yoroe curplus-plancs, using | 3.8. oitinons ot
Gwpioiow nature as bis agents.) 7S

Cearles bas been forced in recent noothe to mati: .
leans to the Duvalier government, the last one having been o
am the vicinity of $700,000. As a veault.ho claims that ssi:
aia monk 18 in 6 precarious pusition. _ Tenretere, ws :

Q@uries mes any ‘usizess- interests ta, mits apart.
@rea 219 ‘Sanzing ezeration (esecntial. -@4le, sical ote.).
Mnitias oxziles caticate that as many as 4,000. porecas am
may. bo forandont: ont bia for their Livelinced. (rate: “
faeludos sopendenta: of his eaployecs)...

|. Charles: 18 poerly ‘ egaraea by: the state Departaent.. .
fhe czpurtaont’a Stance ¢ceards him a8 & Successer te a
Dovalics has 4 seen even more: negative “than 48 customary.

The current repert turned in by Louts. BRUM; his. |
Fepesnentative ip Now York, appoars to he: nothing mere than
Ga Onn2ies Uf bin. attonpts to panic the U.5, und thus -

‘sinet



--- Page 169 ---
1400000 |

. Stoic!
2.
evils. The list of nines of his alleged supporters is _ .
: meaningless. His sdheronts in the army are not identified .~ : a
yo: Gnd aro suspect. a ; : : .
‘ Hie referral in this, and ins previous report, to : : ,
Castro and Balaguer as his compotiters in a race to ; : an ,
overthrow Duvalier is considered to be nonsense. All ~ , fot ;
this is calculated to force the.U.8, haad in. his favor. eee ‘
St + Hig attompt:to find a channel to the pentagon are in | .
4 . the pattera of his action for several years, ‘Bhould he. B .
: . “@ucc0eed he might be convincing enough ‘to cause trouble. — i



--- Page 170 ---
14-00000

ft a
~wworns Olves Tino - _ —
Gtassivy tosrice nome / 34 224

ee AFSL

HAS: To bnance a ‘
oestacy. O) sic. 2 As bi i
1
é
no ;
| DIRECTOR INFO PANAMA CITY, REP/LANT, JHWAVE, SANTO DoMINGQ
(REF? DIRECTORGSS70 ve .
|... de) CHARLES USING VISA BUSINESS a3: ‘EXCUSE cane ~ ;
TO EMBASSY. . WHILE THERE HE ASKED SPEAK TO POLITICAL OFFICER, 4
\ WAS DIRECTED TO UR. CLARENCE BREAUX WHO LISTENED TO HIS ‘story
.WALCH ALMOST IDENTICAL REFERENCE. —_ o |

2. DUE FACT CHARGE LIMITING CABLE. TRAFFIC MEMCON WILL -

ef POUCHED. . CHARLES INSISTED NO: ACTION WOULD ‘TAKE PLACE
on UNTIL OCTOBER. - STATION cONCURS Has COMMENT THERE No INFO .
Mat 20M SUBSTANTIATE CHARLES CAPABILITY. FOR A. coup,

BRECRET

4H G67
As TOL



--- Page 171 ---
14-0000

tue

CoUNTay

2.

“sumcer

” QATE OF
: ee

SOURCE:

“ode

DATE ACA. (45. 22 Muy 1947) FIELD REPORT NO. |

. that since Maj. Coton.

Oo Sees :

™ ~. sase- tne
Usatd - ; sepOat NO. CSED-342/C2625-67 -
Autier Pless ef Desa ou
To Overihsew the Hattioa &:
His Niiisary Supporters ont ?
For Suppaat froa Haitioen Neils

pate DISTR. 8 une 1987 - 7
3 NO, PAGES 3 oo - -. - _— rns

ABTERENCES
Midelave Moy 1987

SRT ar na Tree IE ee erent
THIS IS 1S UNEVALUATED INFORMATION, SOURCE GLAGINGS ARE DEFINITIVE, APPRAISAL OF CONTONT tS TLNTATIVE.

Redstho RE  L
A ‘Poreiga businescman With wide ccutaets in Port-ouePrince who is-ballaved.t0 i
teporss be

Seton of charkes. wie Wbouly wa wwus|e that tt-vould reach U.S. officials.

”

Clenond Joseph Chorlea, y sey or the Commercial Ben'c of Halt’, claims { —
close friend, has replaced Cont. Harvy ~~ =-
Tassy in the Yresisential . ‘Guede he (Charles) new has an access te arms
end cosnition ia the bessusnt uf the Palace ana is in a position to carry :
out a coup against Prasiiest srancois Duvalier "in the near ty rs
Althouzs no definite dute nas bean set yet for the coup, Charles is convinced OF
thes it must be carried ont “within the next few mouths” to save Haiti from - .

/ economic end

T) Qe

— Peastruls" the Deosalinas Bexracks through Pderre-Lowts. Col. Octave Caillerd

. Was ree tam aa a fellamscuphie sy Chotles believes that Pierve-] gi

' Cuarlen hes the svppert cf Cagfs Preval (fuu),3 of the Préetentl:t Gurl ;

Atioal chios. Charles, ant especisiny his military Srieniey
feel that 1967 is | She yeas of decision, _ .

Adthougs Col. Plan, eLONte. (en 2 ecmander of the Dessalizes Barracks, 5

knows of ext approves Lis placs to overthrow Duvelier, end Lhst he (Charles), -

as one of the kay. military fisures on wiem Charles pins Bis hopes. Caillard . a
da thovoughly tetLirvedienei wits Duvaller and ds willing to cocperste. Py
Catllard fears that tf Duwulier raanines in power, Haiti's eccneay will be- ran viet
Gemmletaly Taznad and Haitian exiles receiving guerrilla training in Cuba
may attsapt to seize Dowes is Holts. . aa

end realises that higheranicing oftisers loyal to Duvalier could-cause bloodshed; -

Ghasles ani bis anscotates eect viclense during the initial stagea cf the
OADe

. Tn aAddtion to whtpa of the Haition Cocst Quant, charles nov hes the use of

: & 352-ten commriot Lewting erart which normally sails between Jenin
. sb percents curing Slaw San oy ota ‘etce a

. Peerer,
& A Pernt TRAM / MATRA EIR nrmene

:

i

t

;

H

i

ormbetyy Slut tat Loamise “Chie Sntamabtion vas'obcaine..fron a close - : |

a we



--- Page 172 ---
14-00000

S-B-C-RTT
No FORETON DISSE COMLROLLED piss

2.

oe cob D-32/ 01625-67

5. Charles hr no contact with Haltion exile grows until, early Moy 1957,

. when he scat on caissary te Nov York Citv to telk to Louis Snassrieg, a”
prominent anti-Duvalier exile, whose entire fomily was Wed by Dealer's
henchmen. Sansorieq agreed to svyport Charles in oe final chowom with |

. Duvalier and prexised to line up seme of his fellow exiles to syn: a

\ Chorlese A close friend of Charles wos plonning to go to Nav Youn 5
: mid-loay 1967 ostensibly to discusn port developmént projeetn an eaten

Prince with a U.S. construction firn; hewever, the real. purpose of the

, . trip is to contact Heitien exiles to gain their suppor’ for Chaxlese

spot 6. On 19 Noy 1967, a-group of preminent Haatian extles hold a meting dn
‘ New York City to celebrate Het: Flog Daye One of the orgonizors of ,
-.. | - the meeting wes Dre Jumelle: (fm), ‘a medical dector whose beothos was |
0 fexrmor Hoition Minister of Finance and who wes killed by Duvalter..

paoter exile who attended the meting was Vixomar (fmu)? who elodins. or]
a Lego. advisor to the Republic of Chad and who said that ho was going
bed be the next president Heiti. The group of Haitian oxtlos, belleved to -

eal dteclf the "ational Orzanization of Hatt ten Exiles", has seus members.
who back Chorles.: - mae

etter the coup: _ os :

Qe Cole Grecia Jesques of the Presidential Guat « “Jrogus, ‘yno 4s no longer
St blindly loyal to Duvalier, will be necded in the execution of the coup, -
ae . ené can be bought; however, once poor is an the bonis of e military

mos , . duate and Charles, Jacques will, be SLiminatode :

te Tuo Deciz, heal of the Touten-taceutes —

“@e Ghovis destner, Wintster of Fiomnde = en "ensrchtst” vith presidential
: - Sayizetions who has on “undeeround movement 4a Hadi." a

|
|
|
|
%% raise nn an in ion mi Yo nnn os |

@+ Gems Gerard Constant, Chief of Steff... ;
@s : Col Gels Jacques Larcche, Deputy Caiet of Steff = = “ecuvineed Commist.”

‘ fe
e Tf the coup is successful, Chexlles hopes to’ give Andre Theard, formar
‘flegtien Amboassedor to the United States, a (diplamatiaipesss Theamd 4s «

prosUeS. Charles regeria Gere Philipponux, Mintever of Health,
: as © Very olck man with no further politieal axpiratione, .

Se

Gece frienta of Chives are convinesl that Chriss hes né choles bub to
., C8ErY out a coup with or without Loren help, anil that his choices of success.
G0 Box! because several of Divelier's mew appointees to key nositions ‘ore.
frlenis ef Cherles; also, thes Cunrles must net coon becauns. “he morale, of.
Bay!

of Duvolior's militery ont elvilinn ‘supporters has resuhid es eli-tine.-
ov: ent veosune the Haitian Treamry to elecgt empty. : i

Le Solsou gon may be- tags Bergs Coden.
Ge Prelobly Le Col. Luc Plerre-Loutes we ch
$e Ancther source has ddenté: fed Preval. as cents Walter Powe

7 efit Patt
YO FOALION 075 mye OLLIE Due



--- Page 173 ---
14-0000

te . S-E-C-f-2-7 : So
-. NO FOREIGN DIssiu,/CoMPROLLED DISSE .

>. gapg2/on6es-67
: ; _

4. Prodebly Dr. Gaston dunelle. .. : -

. : . Se Probcbly Henrd Vixamar.- : _ a . ao
_ C8DB-319/0128-67 recently reported other plans of Clenard Joacyh Charles. .

BBO-R-Eet =.
NO FORDION DISOEM/COMMOLEED prsguy



--- Page 174 ---
14-0000

” ITUATION
REQUESTED

TRANSMITTAL
+ TOCS INFORMATION hEPORT

RMATION COPIES
CS/DO, CI/IC, CI/OPS, FI, FI/D, FI/INT 6, IW, cao 4, CA PEG, cA 3s,
_WH/COG 4, mos pel, foes | Doe: FON; She .

NO FOREIGN ‘DISSEM/CONTROLLED DISSE -

RECOMMEND FOR EXO, BASIC DOCUMENT HAS NOT BEEN MADE ; AVATLABLE TO
REQUEST FOR RELAY TO REP/LANT, PANAMA CITY, PORY AU PRINCE, JUMAYE,
AND SANTO DOMINGO ATTACHED,

GS MMERNAL USE OLY

sf

“secret Er

(WHEN PRED IN)



--- Page 175 ---
14-00080

os

, if

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY © ° ROUTINE °
- Intelligence Information Cable. « re
: ___ PAGE 1 OF 3 PAGES

nr ca re
STATE/INR BIA ARMY WAVY AIR JCS SECORF NSA NIC AID UDIA 600° ar ae oRA ocs COS CIA/NMCC
(2) 2. :

FBI
formation frects the National Defense of the Lawa, Title BO,
Sond Wa tai amt lal Raceline cael aerl aire, wa, 18, U.

em +

NO FOREIGN DISSEM/CONTROLLED - -DISSEM - : _- | oat
. THIS IS AN. INFORMATION REPORT, NOT FINALLY EVALUATED. INTELLIGENCE.

8-E-C-R-E-T ee . _ CITE THespB-315/01965-67

| DST .8 ‘JUNE 1967 -
COUNTRY. HAITI

Bor _ LATE: MAY 1967 ”- 20°72

| ‘SUBJECT READINESS OF CLEMARD JOSEPH-CHARLES..  °

“hoo. ° > $0 OVERTHROW .THE HAITIAN GOVERNMENT .

wg 6 UNE 1967 “RED NO.

"FOREIGN BUSINESSMAN WITH WIDE contacts IN PoRT AU PRINCE WHO IS

, BELIEVED TO REPORT. ACCURATELY WHAT HE LEARNS, | ‘THIS. ‘INFORMATION =.
As OBTAINED FROM A CLOSE FRIEND oF. CHARLES WHO. PROBABLY WAS .
AWARE THAT ‘IT WOULD REACH u. 8. OFFICIALS

ON 24 MAY : 1987, CLEMARD: JOSEPH - CHARLES, PRESIDENT or -
THE COMMERCIAL BANK or HAITI, SAID THAT HE WAS. "100 PERCENT.
READY TO GO. THROUGH WITH THE ' BUSINESS. TRANSACTION’ AND Pty
NOT WANT TO WASTE’ TIME: RECAUSE “LOCAL ‘BUSINESS ‘COMPETTTORS" :
MIGHT: GET AHEAD OF HIM, “CHARLES: REITERATED THAT’ IW WAS. IMPERATIVE
THAT ‘BIS THO PRINCIPAL “FOREIGN COMPETITORS," I. Bey: “PIDEL - CASTRO
AND DOMINICAN PRESIDENT JOAQUIN BALAGUER» ‘BE NEUTRALIZED TO .
PREVENT THEM FROM SPOILING nIs "PRORISING. BUS: NESS: DEAL, ‘

onl
é

S--C-R-E-T/NO FOREIGN DISSEM/CONTROLLED DIS8EM
cea AALHACAIED emai SORA ay



--- Page 176 ---
14-0000

$CsDB-315/01965-67
PAGE 2 OF 3 PAGES

o S-E-C-R--E-T/NO FOREIGN DISSEM/CONTROLLED DISSEM
exealStazsifcation rots,

.. QOURCE COMMENT: THIS DEAL 18, OF couse, CHARLES". ATTEMPT TO
| _ OVERTHROW THE DUVALIER GOVERNMENT. ) a
. | “to. Be ON 30 MAY, CHARLES AGAIN WARNED oF THE NECESSITY or

NEUTRALIZING CASTRO AND BALAGUER BECAUSE OF: THE. "EXTREME, URGENCY .

_ OF THE BUSINESS MATTER," (SOURCE: COMMENT: aT 18 BELIEVED ‘THAT

BVEN, IP CHARLES IS SUCCESSFUL iN, HIS couP AGAINST DUVALIER, RE
“stm. WILL FEAR. INTERVENTION BY ‘CASTRO “AND BALAGUER, ) . IN THIS:
“ “RESPECT, CHARLES HAS URGED" HIS CLOSE ASSOCIATES. ‘TO BO “EVERYTHING . :
Im THEIR POWER TO PREVENT CASTRO AND BALAGUER FROM ANY, ACTION _
" AGAINST HIS PLAN, AND ‘HAS, ENDEAVORED TO. SECURE. SUPPORT FROM: :
_ HAYTIAN EXILES IN THE UNITED STATES... 8
EOS rauis SANSARICQ, A HAITIAN. EXILE’ 1 THE UNITED erates,
HIS: SON HAVE PROMISED CHARLES THEIR FULL COOPERATION, =
GANGARICQ’ 8. SON, WHO 18. CONNECTED WITH. HE HAITIAN COALITION m
MEW YORK, NOW I8 PLANNING TO INTENSIFY PROPAGANDA AGAINST —
DUVALIER AND HIS HENCHMEN, . FROM TIME TO TIME, THIS PROPAGANDA

“E ROaKeE 4

Sree)

‘WILL BE LESS SHARP THAN THOSE pinecTeD AGAINST ‘OTHER SUPPORTERS
~_ . OF THE REOIME, "THE AAMBARTOGS © WILL: TRY TO MAKE. (CHARLES

B=B-C-R-R=1/NO FOREIGN DISSEM/COWTROLLED DISSEM :


--- Page 177 ---
14-0000

: i
wd
?
i - Te
i ' [
se wes DB-315/01965-67 4
_ 7 ot _ 7: . "PAGES OFS PAGES ; 4
« S~E~C-R-E-T/NO FOREIGN DISSEM/CONTROLLED DISSEM Bt ‘| ;
* . ACCEPTABLE TO THE-HAITIAN COALITION IN THE UNITED STATES, FOR THEIR. I ‘
See ee oe *- EFFORTS,- CHARLES HAS- PROMISED THE SANSARICQS “IMPORTANT ‘GOVERNMENT foo
| POSTS IN HTS. (CHARLES) FUTURE CABINET": - . oi v a
4. (HEADQUARTERS COMMENT:- ‘FOR SOME ‘TIME, CHARLES. ‘HAS SAID THAT 4 mo
| HE PLANS TO OVERTHROW DUVALIER WITH. OR ‘WITHOUT v. 8. , SUPPORT, HIS .
7 4 .

- CSDB-312/01428-67: AND csps-812/01625-67 FOR sounce's ‘RECENT INFORMA, ;
“(NION ON CHARLES' PLANS AND HAITIAN. SUPPORT: FOR A: COUP, _ THERE. 18 NO: ea
"INFORMATION FROM: OTHER SOURCES: TO SUBSTANTIATE E CHARLES" CAPABILITY. '
"FOR A COUP.)

8.. FIELD DISSEM: ‘cancso, exvcuare eo port AU PRIXCE :
AND savTo. DOMINGO.) ; nee

| fleBeCoReBeT/HO: FORSIGN DISSEM/CONTROLLED: DISSE



--- Page 178 ---
14-0000

es ted : i at . : ‘

oO UNCLASSIFIED oe CONFIDE. ‘ tAL.

OD Mt - 2 seceér=

George S, Musulin/js Plan |
BCS/Operational wis taff

crate a nen
~

COMMENTS (Number @:ch sommert to chow from whom :
fo whom. Drow ¢ line across column ater cach comment) P  -

Attached, is ‘copy. of Contacts/. ~
; New York 8152 for your info —
: “and Fetention, : 2

2. WH/7/ut
“ATTN: Messrs,' Grenillio



--- Page 179 ---
14-0000

cet | Sha od id we

SECRET SENSITIVE @o183z CITE contacts ity Yon #132.
_ CONTACTS WASHINGTON

“OPERATIONAL. SUPPORT STAFF CHUSULIN9 HOM. enina- wees!
"THIS. SENSITIVE
CASE 47,940,
"CONF IRY ING RUSULIN aio TELECON 7 gun 67

a Ae AT BIONIGHT SUNDAY, 4 JUME, Lous a,
‘OB INTERNATIONAL CORP,
_ DEVELOPHENTS IN. WAITE

TRUSTED HAITIAN FRIEND JOT AnR VED IN NYC “AND: “BROUGHT
‘BACK NEWS OF WIDESPREAD FEAR GRIFF Ing HAITI. _COLGNEL Tassy, We
CHARAE OF CRISINAL DIVIStON. AT P05 eauePRincy, AND HIS BROTHER TOOK.

Rt REFUGE at aN UNNANED (PRESUMABLY LATIN AMERICAN ): EMBASSY: aN THE

: a Take “THE COLONEL VAS RECESTLY TRausrEnnen TO “DEPARTHENT oF a.
a WoRTi* INSTEAD OF TAKING UP HES sty POSITION HE FLED. TO ExBABsY.

25. ReLatives OF DE CAgALOGHE, ronneen OIRECTOR: oF.
' @ntseet DIRECTOR IS DUVALIEN’S Son etn AN) aso
" nerune a an Enassy, ’

“Bw27 Ee.

SRUN ,: Prtsivewt
N¥e CaLLzo AND ToL baLog ABOUT. LATEST

TOURISH.-
80 S0UaNT AND POUND :

FE. aU digi ates Seapets Ne cen aa ~

ol



--- Page 180 ---
14-00000

"PaGE “2 CONTACTS MEW YORK «152 3 EC RE TVSENSITIVE
WACOUTE 18 BUSIER THEN EVER.

. qT
5. SUNDAY EVENING A NEPHEW OF CATADIAN CITIZEN HARRY A DOLANSKY,
LEFT POT *AUSPKINCE- TOGETHER WITH ALLAN COLTON, CANADIAN OWNER OF - ia
HAITIAN INTERNATIONAL LEATHEH CORPORATION, PORT “AU-PRINCE» _DOLANSKY °S ot
“NEPHEW CALLED BRUN. -FRON MONTKEAL. ACCORDING TO’ HIN
© DUVALIER LEARNED ABOUT CHAKLES* PLOTTING AND ALSO MAS
MNOWLEOGE OF BRUN*s INVOLVENENT «

THE NEPHEW STRONGLY: ADVISED - i i
BRUN- To FOREGO HIS TRIP TO PORT -AU¥RINCE aT THis. TUSE | HE FEELS | /
THAT THE LIFE OF BRUN, a. NATURAL IZED US (CITIZEN, oF WAIT EAN: ESCENT: -
HAY: BE IN. DANGER: IF HE GOES To- -PORT *AU PRINCE ° “SINCE. PAPA, t

SCOMPLETETLY UNPREDICATABLE. AND FEELS. conveRED BY HIS. ENEMIES AND.

FRIENDS ‘suCH AS CHARLES AND OTHERS". THE NEPHEW REMINDED BRUN
_ THAT HE GRUN) HAS A WIFE AND FOUR SRALL- CHILDREN: IN. NYC.
"Ge “NOW BRUNS IS TORN BETWEEN HIS LOYALTY To AIS. FRIEND’ CHARLES:

_ AND HIS Own FANILY. IN HIS PLIGHT HE ASKED BALOG FOR: ADVICES -

WE TOLD HIM THAT, WHILE PERSONALLY VE SYMPHATIZE. WITH HIM:
"PROFESSIONALLY VE ARE NOT IN POSITION To. ADJISE HIN OW HIB PROJECTED.
“ERIP To PORT “AUPRINCE, WHICH VAS SCHEDULED FOR: 11458 any -9 JUNE.
Jaw INFORMED US'THAT HELL ALSO SKEK THE ADVICE OF HIS_FBr

“contact RAN wH0 HAS. DEALT WITH HIN RE HAITIAN DEVELOPMENTS FOR .

{



--- Page 181 ---
14-00000

FASE S$ CUNTACTS/ca¥ Yun ube 5 EC a E T/SENSITIVE
SOME TIME.

nm Te AT TAU MONDAY, 5 JUNE, BHUN CALLED CHARLES IN PORT “Au PRINCE.
THE OANKER REPEATED HIS TELEPHONE REQUEST MADE ON MONDAY, 4 JUN FOR
BRUNS'S TRIP TO HAITIAN CAPITAL ON KONDAY TO DISCUSS “URGENT BUSINESS os
“MATTERS.” CHARLES EMPHASIZED THAT “NO POLITICS WAS INVOLVED 5 THE boo
PURPOSE OF THEIR GET TOGETHER 18 PURELY BUSINESS NATURE.°° AFTER’ THAT po
BRUN, OVERRULING HIS WIFE'S OBJECTIONS, DECIDED To GO. Hz. TOOK: or!
FRON. KENSEDY IAP, MONDAY, AT 11853 AM ON PAN Arlo. 00+

a a AS” A PRECAUTIONARY. NEASURE BRU WILL REGISTER vith. us DIPLo-
vatic REPRESENTATION ‘AT PORT=AU-PRINCE. HE HAS NoT ong “THAT

. BEFORE. coytaD WAT Se Pasha 7. ana ivi GN fh a

_. SERS BRUN HOPES TO BE BACK VEDNESDAY THIS WEEK e wuren Tan

: aL: CALL BALOG. | 12TH wt Stuieg ate ey
SEU WE T SENSITIVE CARE Ket Bt ke :

(ge TAL ST Th, COLLHL Wau WECANTLE ikadsieaKle ed PO i oe

BORTATY INSTEAD OF. TAKIMs 1? Was ate See ne iH

: at beet ar te. caguive Tanai ay



--- Page 182 ---
14-00000

: “ ~ ing i :
oO UNCLASSIFIED 2 man ener} 1s IT CONF\. -NTIAL (J secret
; ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET
SUBJECT: (Options! A . .
Clenard Joseph Charles, Plot to Qverthrov Duval ter Governneat ©
‘ #ROM, urension | 0. ~ ; :
ne , Operational Support Staff, DCS. bes Case 47,540 (ometiye) 7 ‘

George 8. 9 Masulinty, ee
200. vey y Jo aid . 2268 6 June 1967 | ; U
wet) a . “

l ){ for your retention.

a ree lo aa a |

Bar. GLO use” C). secret a coi oO us oa Qo UNCLASSIFICD



--- Page 183 ---
14-0000

SECRET

“SECRE “TAENSITVE 0920312 CITE tometer “YORK 8149"
{QONTACTS/WASHINGTON ; ;
- OPERATIONAL SUPPORT STAFF: CAUSULTNS FROM BALOG
THIS I8 SENSITIVE
SUBJECTS CASE 47,540 mo ;
. dle CLEMARD. JOSEPHO CHARLES AND Louis he BRUN wave: “BEEN i
: FREQUENT PHONE CONTACT VITH EACH OTHER: IN, RECENT Days. Ww apbi Tio ON:
_BRUN RECEIVED SEVERAL LETTERS FROM CHARLES WHICH WERE WANDCARRIED:
i BY TRUSTED FRIENDS . CE ee
-3N A LETTER, DATED 24 MAY, CHARLES STATED THAT HE. vas —
Meo. PER CENT READY TO GO THROUGH BUSINESS TRANSACTION AND I
Don't WANT TO VASTE TIME BECAUSE LOCAL BUSINESS, ‘SOMPETITORS- MAY GET
| ANRAD OF KE." TEMARLES REPEATED HIS PREVIOUS REQUEST THAT “NR BELL AND
‘, SOMPANY® - CTHE CODE NANES CHARLES BESTOWED OW: NAJOR: BaLoa AND THE ,
f° PBNTAGOND AUST. MAKE IT IMPOSSIBLE POR THE TWO. PRINCIPAL. FOREIGN :
yo QIAPET 2TORS, » Lo oe CASTRO AND BALAGNER, TO SPOIL THE. °PRONISING: BUSINESS |
~ (PRALe”. THIS DEAL 18 OF COURSE KIS ATTEMP? TO. OVERTHROW “THE DUVALIER:
@OVERNNENT.
I ANOTHER LETTER, DATED sa: MAY, CHARLES WARNS: BRUN oF: TH.

‘ova 7

Lata .

we be:



--- Page 184 ---
14-0000

| COMPETITION BY SAID COMPANY". BRUN FEELS THAT EVEN IF HIS” coup

4
sree caises emt sien bet me

PAGE 2 CONTACTS/NEW YORK 8149 SEC RE T/SENSITIVE :
-. COMPANY” AND AGAIN REQUESTS THE “NEUTRALIZATION OF. FOREIGN

AGANST DUVALIER “SUCCEEDS CHARLES STILL: FEARS INTERVENTION BY”
| GASTRO "AND BALAGUER. . CHARLES URGED BRU "TO DO EVERYTHING tr
_ PERSUADE MR. BELL'S COMPANY. HOW IMPORTANT IT IS TO GET RID OF =
“POSSIBLE FOREIGN COMPETITION.” CNARLES ALSO ADVISED BRUN THAT HE
‘HAS TO UNDERGO: AN OPERATION TO. REMOVE. A BENIGN GROVTH. Pron ns
THROAT. noe
© Ae AT CHARLES* REQUEST BRUN KAS BEEN IN CONSTANT. CONTACT WITH. oa
HAITIAN EXILES IN HYC TO SECURE THEIR SUPPORT FOR THE BANKER, Lours oo.
SANSARICG, AND HIS GON PROMISED FULL COOPERATION, SANSARICG'S SON
"WMO 1S CONNECTED VITH THE HAITIAN EXILE RADIO BROADCASTING ANTI~\
| DUVALIER MATERIAL FROMTHE US TO HAITI NOW REGULARLY DELIVERS” ‘TAPED.
1.1" PROPAGANDA TO BRUM BEFORE TRANSAISSION,~ BRUN AWD YOUNG SANSARICG
‘ARE HOW PLANING TO" INTENSIFY PROPAGANDA AGAINST DUVALIER AND HIS
" MRENCHNEN, PROM TINE TO TINE: EXILE RADIO. WILL. CONTINUE TO. “ATTACK .
GHARLES FOR NIS SUPPORT OF REGINE 90 AS NOT TO AROUSE. PAPAYS:
SUSPICION, THESE: ATTACKS, HOVEVER, VILL BE LESS SHARP: THAN THOSE
DIRECTED AGAINST OTHER SUPPORTERS OF THE REGINE.. IN ANY. -
 RVENT, ree SANSARICAS WILL TRY TO MAKE CHARLES ACCEPTABLE: 0 THE.

ot



--- Page 185 ---
1400000 =

PAGE $ CONTACTS/NEW YORK 6149 SEC RE T/SENSITIVE 0°

' HAITIAN COALITIGN” IN-NYC. FOR THEIR LABOR THEY. WERE PROWISED
” *THPORTANT GOVERNMENT POSTS IN CHARLES* FUTURE CABINET." : oe
Se “ BRUN INFORMED US THAT: CHARLES?S. SUPPORTER EDMOND’ VILAIRE, Tee ; = * rots
- PORT=AU *PRINCE SHIPOWNER, WILL RETURN FROM. NYC. 10 HAITI.OH 8 ‘JUN 67

.

ao eces PARA 3. SHOULD HAVE BEEN INDENTED TREE ‘SPACES
“PARA 5. “LINE FOUR WA THROUGH BRUN VINCE BRN -



--- Page 186 ---
14-0000

“67 -
| SURIECT

DATE OF Barly © sey asst
INFO. =

PLACE & a
DATE ACQ, (9 Moe 2957)

ALO REPELT =.
ThiS 1S UNEVAQUATED INCOMAATION, 90U.08 Giv.5i:

- 7
SOURCE A Yorsigs Susinessman with wide oo.:

22 TorteaaePrince. - Source .

iy
1
* . / POports an‘vequentiy, but hie ix ts Solteved to LG reliable. - ee ,
Be recoivea the daformaticn trea a pot. slcse to Charles. oy "y | 4
- Qe In dicoussing the possibility af ov.rthe ning tha Davalter Govermect tn 7 a '
. the necr ture, Clezarnd Toe gh hale Stbactat af the Cemircie. band. . | ’
: of Eaiti, said ho now as resty to wears. Ble leagepl onned echors. vs mos {
a selse power with hia military and ouvilias friends tc. Purt-eu-Prisve, wath! 1 ‘
| | om without the kelp of the Usd. Covert ate’ fhe coils in hie ecforte — / | a
to cova... U.S. curpert fer hts plas, Cr. cet seid dateras to. [x] ons 7 5 .
wite th. p.ot, Dut ha sate the exeensl .
time. Ecwover, Charles beileve: that i” t
U.S. to sive ie ald nesoscary help in .5 a ettere toc get ma or .
Duvolier vac has brought Hattt to chs r wns of . og .
| @e Chases sada that ke hos rifles “baa. sar . “premates bitder "Seney tio ln .7 : :
so “Hatin” ord thas through his good trian. . siosel Octave Cayara,? Cm aE
. et to3 3. webes Coast Cuani, throes Naitd.” boats, whieh carry canisc..,
. "whl. ve udex his contral. -

Cayark camncy is retest énoagh armuntcicn for: |
: the -cnccns, but Charles heres te Setain the nesessary ancunt fron she ||

UeS. Gree e He would like to yet ibe smamizien feoa the US NE: 5
a ainwctt iarcics, BOXER, which has ‘beer “A Guty ia the Sardbbean oma oo
4 . for sume Lins. , aa

2.38 saya’, - Chovles. has the sepyort tf ar. wenanea hls wranising aban
aes ufézeers Charles ani his niiicary eri civilian fricais plan t.. -
2 & provisional junts and get rid of the "erentes cf Haiti," tiat is,
aS a hig supporters. Arter the sonsolidetioa of power te tha
whe junta, Charles plans to rua for President oni is, corrinzed:
oa wir Giroe he hi many cupposters in PorteauePrinsé. as w.
a. the “peral aveas of Hoitt.. Cnarles claims that he contres"

une .
whds and Episcapal olergy, teachers ond students, several businsse..2n,
say ~2iisionea in tho rural ureas who are waacing tor Lioall Bayt. te

overchrow the present recimes ~ uo.

B-R-CeR-EoT,

* SA manmwnn nteame /anamanr rn teem oles bh : . 7



--- Page 187 ---
14-0000

NO YORBIGH DISSI4/CORSACLLED, DISSEX

4, ~ S Pact

Le -. ggpp312/01428-87

Charles hes stated that cheud ko hacer President of Eaitd, he would ~

‘pursue a pxv--U.S. policy, cli:inating the Duvalierista and ths Camunists .
ond establishing a "liberal descoratic" regina.

5. Chorles still ie pretending to bee a leyal supporter of Duvallor; however,
hie position has vocouo shaky auc he belicves that his life is in dangers’ |
Ho feels thut ho nay wall victiia to Duvalier unless he (Charles) strives:
first. Yor the time being, Charlies wil. continue to support Duvilier in
en offors to allay the Prosidcat's suspicions. As president of tho
Haitian Chauber of Commerce, Churlcas soon will deliver a specch praising
the ochioverents of Duvelicr. He ia anxious for the U.S. vo know thot
Lo. - ‘his overtures toward Duva)icr arc pretense and that he is detorined to” i,
te 80 into action sgainot the prosent regine. -

Lo peatquertere Comints . ee . i . _
’ * @ge§21/05457-67, from another relisble source, reported that Charles ana/ | te
Herve Boyer, former Miniator of TMnance under puvaliery \ were contending * yop oa
a for power in the Haitic.. Government. = . - 7

- de Tn the post severod months,, Charles has male mumsrous attempts to -
, ic... . @ldedt support fraa several U.S. Government agencies for hig pot
ae egainst the Duvalier Government.

No xenson was given for Charles' belie? that it would be-in the best ~
interest of the U.S. to suoport his. scheme to overthrow Duvolier, >. >
Howavor, he may be referring to his claim that should he bcocone 2 oF
President of Haiti following the overthrow of Duvalier, he intends |

to pursue a pro-U.8. policy and establish e@ “liberal democratic" —
segine.

loxece Comment: Cayard, who enjoys the confidence of Duvelter, 10
@ Gecret ally of Charles, - . . .

: BeB-C-R-D-T
“40 FORSION DISEHN/CobKOLLED DISSIN .

‘



--- Page 188 ---
14-0000

hore C07)
aa Nee key
Gace oi Seale fecyeoner)

GUWICT) New Uae sages frau Clemacd J. Charteo/OQurrent HaStian Bitte
Aativities in Baw Tors City

2. On 40 May 1997, Louls a, Rew, President, ‘B&B Interastiona: _.
Corporation, Bew York chy, furnished the folloving “nforwations

@.- Clenant dceeeh aries, Prostiant, Iarque- Caarited a*watts,
Por veas-Priage, cleiw thet hls wlittary etd clvilien aati-Duvalter.
frees are crywnise: Lt “etrupg aelle remy to strides ube: the ting |
arrives." Ke alno cialer 90 rave aviperters aumg Maltian mites ia
the U2 ent "oo the leiends surrowding Matti.”

3.. Grarles reterpued Dis previus Bscarticn ‘whet be: will depose -

- Divalier wits oF VitDas Ua talp ef the OS, Wut be would prefer to.
wake content vith o “V8 Lialsen am Ln Purt-ei-Priose to speed up.
‘taatugs .” : . ee

“"" be fhe floanniel crisio deepant gach day. Bwreemmas are falling, ant
: foreign rapites cantizuss wo stay amy... : Attegte vo eal Teeacaey
Vonks broad end atirett tariets have utterly railes.. hm eftars
®o attract foreign Lovesunmt, Me. Auguste, Maiti'n former micassetor
te the UR anf recently aprictel wiiessaice t) fest teeny,
| 8 busizsarimn trom Bareit (nave ceo alven) to pave an:
@rilenze with Prociigat Bivelter ca <5 May 197 im order wo Aievuse & .
- Wasineve deal, Diaries experts to ve prevent on this ceeuslon. - :

$s Dawaller fe not wel. Ta abiiiion to diabeter, be hes wat Charles.
. Ggvarthes “arter/oaclercsie paycboois.” ete wry auch upses by
he failure of Lis scn-loclay, the Miriover of fairies, "to echh maith
We forsign touriets, Ba {2 uleo disturtet ‘abolt the west beharlor
Of hie uthar scowaneLev, Lt. Col. Masintlien Ousiniza. _dacosding te
incurred the prisicential wrath ty moving out of

. resigned oie qlere easiq<uemt-via his wits. .
“Saar rafuunk so sean, the latter of rosianatin frm his eughter
7 naw An lant 003 ae the pisstaanie pouple Sennen restgore



--- Page 189 ---
14-0000 |

WV 61~-T
tage 2

é. Qharies otates that Grecia Jaoqzias, ablef of the Presidential Guard, |
, “wil, be needed in the execution of the plan.” Ho feals that

. : Pecqies is vo longer bitaily loyal to lavalier avi that be can be

pF  pought. Goce Ue paver 16 in the ranis of @ military junte.aod _

. Gurion, Jusqes “Will be elisinated.”

. oe Gre denker further. stapes int havest end cempetant eitioms, woo
- , YS alee prowl, wtll Bs brought. inte the government, dove of tae
exiles nev in the US Ell ce is the yurerment, .

8. Gries Lretats thet he and tis friecds are strong encugi: on the
. Gomestie se@re to dn emay with the Duvaller government. “seoner or
Jeter.” Hie greatest tear ie that efther Gastro or Mager aight
. Qaterfere in Beitt's affetre fullowing a-coup egauist Wuwlier. He
earcestly hues jee reer terypisantriarerp penne athena sph
“aleee:. triends.": -

- ea an touen wits wn hatoor ta Ferteasdrinee, XP ble vin dn greedy.

be vill divulge nis plan (nanan, eve.) to the “Matson nen.” os
Cy
tn

New York City to selatiuce Auition Viag Baye Ode of the organiners
wae Dy. dawlle, on M.D. whose brotier, ® former Hinioter-of Finesse, —
was killei vy Buvalier. Acuther exile in attanienss wae (fn) - .

. legal cévisar 6 the Rrpublic of Gaed.
Dru A mpetic, stated,

project of PertenPrince.. a”
Cory taportent infarestion relative to. the: Charles! plan." :



--- Page 190 ---
14-0000

ween elit . eo
La Way 67 , ‘ os a
Ouse Nf )540 (Beupanret) ; 4

GUETEOP; «AAM tional Tatormetion Concerning Plane of Heitian Inakar,
Camm Josqyt: Gurles, to Overthrow tus Davelier Ouvarne . oe
went Lost .

ateeye

Se toute AL bem, Dard B ictermational Gcsporetios, mig’ BrowAway »
Bev York, HY, fucciael va ‘Polowles @liitional inforvacter
eoncernlag ew Gevelcjaents in Yass. el plans oF baition beuser,
Oaemri Jsegs Cass, wi bie tlsilary auf aivilian aswoctstes to

. overthrw toe Duvaller grvercaent.

-Gnlonal Qailiard, 5 aS" ot whe Patties Goast Quart, “ta defintely one. .
. re the vey ulliauy “flgores un whom. Charles pias rir hopes. Geiliare
” $e thoresghly dfeliuuianel wits Drvalier end bs williny to ax-rerete. ;

with charles... Qnii-ard. fesis tat if Diealler senalos in power, Ke. | we
. |” @atnany of the euuctr? Will ve cumpletaly ruinet ani that hultiac wdles ©
me, now baling tralosi.in gucriiia warfare tr Gite ay attawt %o seize |

o> panter. Ae @ preepera.s fairy Tarwer, vhcee wealth 1s estina.ed to be
Qpproxicately G8) ‘alli, Celllerd has « loge stake in the furure.

- @f Raitt. He Seals thay “patriote Fol ee Gisarlew @ud binegls” must

- @liatnate Duveiler ud his heuhesn.. ”

Atma Giaries 14 vot. nase Colael Pierre Loita; offize? ta ebaree
 @f Whe Overues Deseaiins:, PortemiePrcinge, as a fellov-consytrater,
”-@here to ress to believw tat Loile knows.end anproves tue plans to
@varthroy Davalier. Woarles ext lauls ere god friede; the tezher
Wen Dest van at te weiiirg Of the Oslouel's dwignter, ‘When the .
Qovernnest was Weble t4 pry Livls end bie saldlare ci cies, ou several,
Socactons, Charles od:racet memay' 00 thet Laake net seme of nis Wustet:

oe o nemter of the Brmonte Plain; Rar’ of
Maiti, is eleo emre of Crarles'-y lye. Levey 16 @ reepecte’ yubhic
Pag@ore vho hen unde several trips ty dhe UE. is on erfort te oan
Capital for the “altias eine. Se las given: up all hype and ie
ecnvinced thay the Quvaltior Gemereme\ taunt be itaicaced.



--- Page 191 ---
14-0000

ie : . Ot. Tytatte Catbetrel in RateuePrine. In wattion,. he sake we

4 a 6. Charhes 1) Pilly evure of the danger omfronting hin ani Ais fellow

WEST
Pege a

.. S$. Curios claizs the aqnort of A substantial sexment af the ale-gy,
Bo, inteliigoutsla, teasers, end students en weil ao (amsaile lo the
. Tur arves. As 8 tevout Bouma Gatinlic, he sainteis @ 92090
Fesetierslidiy anit the obares wudvritios and iso hefrleuiel ire
Bene POtiles, Blovy Wonnll'’a svecensar ot toe @ierceller Quwob's.

neve Gren. iuyarten’ amapapermen on bie payroll .

emspiiators, Yut Uy ere Setorsinsd to “allainaty” Duwalier and his
|. Lo ‘hey cappurtere. 85.c-6 Queries “eontcrals” Cascruse Desselies through -
PF Boones Larass, ert the Cuase urd thru Galiwmel Catlani, ba is
ommfidest that tn toe ocent of m sudcesentl cam by 9 allitary junte -
he and ils apedclares whl Pe atle ve rood up the yrinctpal mgmorters,
ef Srvaaier., Aug ‘st tes bis om, Gaptalu Preval,. ic tie
Preatio ial Qian, he recises tes Eigners hing vificere loyal to
" Dawalter ema ceise Eloalehed. Carles and hie aseccintes acpeot | {
wtalence uring we initial eteges of their ogup. %o definite date |
Ras yout bens est far motien, bas Garles {s canvin:el tat tue sap os
"gust be sarrial cut “vitnin the o0.8 fev mnths” to vere the country .
: frase @eccanke evi patitiesd chess. En any. case, Charles aut eovectally,
his alli tary froeute teal thas 1g9eT ts weyear of deaision.

‘At precent, Coarles: hes no eutent wits fatsian extis rape. Beurver,
Anitsal steps 02 estehitad a good relationship vith exes in the ‘3.

Gave bee tata. th serly toy 1957, Brin est lee Fanwarteg .s 3.

’ prosi: ant ani -biveltar axdia, Wwee atte femtuy: wee Billed by.
Davector's nendistma. Aensaricy eqresd.w earpore. ‘Chasles: in cave ot ©

> @ Minal ebgvcawe wits Pre ttat Sumaller, Moses, be pranise’ to-
Line ww ecre of ts Celumertias fer Series acd his frieods.

Regotiations tetwnen sista oni Acnsericg are in progress. - .

Be. Fourcent, an Wb. tn Nattd, bs no longer trusted ty Davalier.
Sov Duveller anf nis fusily have tho scrvices of four decors:
Be. Mederd, an orvmpediot: Br. Bersay,. toather. 0 ot,
Br. Buntarge, & general prentitionar; sat %, Bartetinss Bplewet. ~
- Pavalier's dictities le Wr, Bisie Beutt Meru. A mie ree, Tunes
* Gadi, te entrusted. with voniag parialls bood eapor teste uf Duw.ter.
Sows ts wall Land ty we President, Weo.nele hin.e washer of ws

Sagtaictive Cader, -

tome fe



--- Page 192 ---
14-00000

Mmedeesy !

rage 3

9. Guriee ta af Us pluton tet Suvaller ia determine! 2) rowds to

Fests ad face my oppssitlon frua insife ant outelie Uie cranitry.
. ARas Derweller ce vonftAent that ce ca rach any Lasiie orlale,

be Nas wede © sere arreaias® 01'S Frwstiavt doupin Belaoler of the
Dominica: Ashlie. Duvaller waret for eal wee jireites asylum in
the Dominican Beniie in the evect bis goverment. tc overturovn, -
The teu preslisate maintain chise Liaison row Audre Ulam, 0 :
meter >f the Lecislavive Charmer in alti. Simm, ws, eucond ing wo
Garis, ta. resuqneitle for the aunier of wevera. auticburalier
pereics in the Semel area, (reueotly trevels ina jeep vith
Qtylawtio license plate cetread fentn Doninys ant Portesivrince,
Olacn receivel a diplaustic pescpert fron Divwiler.. WeLleon
wustneses in sents. Daninge, ve eteyo to the preetimuclal palaces :

ne’) Tt sowue that the “baitle of the soaseineley” has bees won ty.” :
: Fawerd, Waleter. uf Porta, Th early Wey 1967, Drvelier's other: .
soneineley, bactdgue, ‘ea La en Azuay offiser,. moved wit of tae
Preelienvial palace tayevher with ble wide, Thay Wok uw) residence -
fa PortecucPrince but “beir iniape-dence 414: not.beet long. After.
@ few Arye in tials ver come, Presiient Dimalier aul 11s bodygverts
ate “friendly Vinit” to the Sontugque hase, aod wrt! hie wwoighrer-
@rA eceinalew cack to the presidertial paiace. ‘ Chasdee: ‘bedb aves: that
Doaixagve is nov virtually a prisccer. te eleo- level. from se
@loae 62 the yalace that Drvmlier ether vill appoint or hae already ©
aor tates, Demdinique: to @ cornign dipl-wmtlc poet, wich mania to. |
Squilan axile.”: at tie cane Kise Fuucer) coutinises.te eijey Pomlier's
. Ml scafidence. 3p sue allowed to. viett Bev Cort City vita ‘ate vite.
_ See prensvte Anita wurlea.” pArvar ar wriuetane fil stag te ee
Repere Shay vo Mesias Giny, here be was-ales uomoceesfih ta hie
DE to attract Mexican trrtiste; but as © cunsdlatins prise, be
weerived & deversiten Frum the Maxica2 gevermamt. B

Caries ante Gu Piura eemeite te Bn emearisg certain
Gehividuels i fades: ts

® Grecia Soret, tn charge of te Providectisi Geards me
,, Qmrorenise vith bin in case Ff soup; be mot Le elininntel.,

bw Issa Beste, Dent of on Gen Meme. “east be alininates.
* @levie Saxiser, Rinteter of Finance. Be. is en “puaivhiet? —

With preeidertial aspirations who has conn. “unerereant
mevensnt tu Meith.” Seve ohintnated, oan



--- Page 193 ---
14-0000

. Rhee

4. Gerard PhUtypeux, Ainteter of Uaelth. Di early May lod,

oo : be wee in Yaw form City 60 beet treatamit of @ geri vin brekn
wo wmRor eonds tim. Avery atek may be no louser bas poLtttoal
5 an espirations, . - .

ee ‘Genare Overt Constant, chief of etait. te be dlintnatel.

t. Talent, @ focuser eubessator to Ua US, Be te evrongly prea.
Quarles "hayes" Wo Gim Lin 9 Aiplamitus pose when Le te io @
Position to Or 7,”

| gstaut Saeces iarahey dpe abla of atts * "a convizeet
mo Crummuctes." Fo re chininated, ” nn

@arle otated ‘thet fy. teauhiia, aw ‘eitisen, an H.D., wo lives -
With Ais sen ib PortemicPrizce, ie “an wtercover agent. for

Buvalter.” Ae -da5-tide Lesgabin vas suiaing « tacngsy: for. Develler; ”
“, Rie sen fe pow in carge of an extensive rics plantation.”

Ef Grarles veeeiwwe no WS haiy quuint Brndsar, he vill eet on.
 Bke om. Rowever, ne -kcove that vitamt US help (eemcitien,
| weapoax) 1% any tate several woaths tefore he and his friends are

” weedy to earthe. Raring the interta period, he vill édenvor to.

woheruine the Damlier goverramt on we ecouus) frunt, fo be -
apecifia, ane plans to tell hia frelon frieds camested with tre

Breratioral onebey Nuod ent we World Bal Ut they mist abenton
‘Whe present regis to emplete ecuuntz chace. La milition te .
famishing @ expr of. hie Umsordum addressed to Divalier to the W.
‘@bescndor in Haitt on the wrengloings of Yenrt Bielass, presisant
@ the uattion Totasec.and Hatch Moacyly, be. asre copie: tu" “forel ga
Grougalste.° Guasloe fuels chet enon whe Vcomnnde: ehtiaihion of



--- Page 194 ---
14-0000

Oo bacLassinies .O “tha en a CONF. SENTIAL . a SECRET

ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET.

BUBIECT: (Gptional)
Clemard J. Charles

FROM:

Operational Support Staff,
George S. Musulin:yj
900 Key Bldg.

: prentti

poe ann


--- Page 195 ---
14-0000

| 8 Gas 47,540 (Reopened) Hew Dovelopmente in Placa of Hattien Benker, “* |
_ -' Clumard Joseph Gharles vo Cverthroy the Davaliar Covermat 9° '
| Gadel, Hew York Field Offices Jtnlog/er)’ 25 May 1967 nn te %
3.8 B International Corp. | .
a Bow York, 5. ¥. : ie

nen cy : _ : ‘ de furnishes to Do/u®, =

‘"$afo contained hervin, te
ive to requirements of



--- Page 196 ---
14-0000

fe

| Wes 19087
25 may 1997
Case 47,540 {reopeuat)

COMETS Wow Derolopomte in Plane of Hastian anrer, Clasard Jooerh a
, Harles, to Overthrow the Divalier Government . Oo : .

way 67, Whnond Vilaire, 9 Biltion national, vuo operates a ©. : v

Oa 1k ,
332 ton venverted LC'se 9 cargo ship tn PurtesuePrince, arrived fa | .
Bev Tors: Sty. op.12 12 may GT un the company. of Louts As Brun, BAB a
Interrational Gorp., Veo Your City, be stated ibe fo (lattor~ } '
beat of the Part~enePrince: firm is actecket.) |

Prestiest Divalier has juat trensterred Cayteain arty teary of the .
Presidential Quad tea rural post ad replaced bis with Bajar Coico, ,
tho happens t% de 2 » pooh te Trial of Ciemart Joseph Charlies; (Ctarlee —

cleine thet tarengh, Col cou, he now has gocevs to arms eof emuwition |

&
i
{

f the palace and La 40 « position to carry one © comp

“in the tear Arar ; : +
" after an explosion near tus palace ta mtdcigrth i96?, Sevalter quietly

eturtel vpn a major shekeeup in. the mtlivacy ent: the civil service.

Be Uisntesal ce transferred a cubes of Arey, Milttisa, ami fon Ton

Macoute officers at utvil servints, (nalising thosm who bad previcualy:
served ta the presidential: palace, % date no. Stfietel sanguncenente .

: wae As charge of radio yropeqanta. "ne used. to 00. the
president at lens twice « day. Barge =a trensterres, we:
Seem 15 the northwows region of Medti. -

Peak Wertgta of tae Fm



--- Page 197 ---
14-0000

$e

' layal te Buvelior. Morcover, even the. moot. tatthfal. Luvelier

aCe 2
Page &

Veriquin, viv was in chsrge of the PM in the Putioaville sertion or

_ Perteamuerrince, was dieslesed by Decrwlier benausn. the President

Suspected his of aiding with the Daxtnique clique. Dotiinique, an

Amy officer end soneinaiew of Divaller, ves offered @ aliitery - :
attache position either io Spain or Italy, wuich ho refuced to eccopt .
er bis wile ts relactant to leave Esiti st.thin time. This | :
ettustion 16 camplinated. ty the denision of Duvalior’s wife to aida’ = /
vith her isughter; the rift in his om dusily as well as the attempt
Of hie aoendes to Atvrayt te calevration of ie-Gws birthday act he
Wd anniversary of bis vaking office prompted lumiter to renark that.
Che only men he truste ts Gracia dacques, camander of tt Preciisatial
Guard. Tis statesant aotagoatved aver. those uno. have hitherto ben!

erpparters nov fasy for their lives. ~ Colonel Caillard, who is in -
charge of the Const Quart, ditterly comiainod to Giarles about
Suvalier’s rewurk and. and, rensqured tho-banker tint he and his frienle

. wore ready, to ot wpe military Junta. a :



--- Page 198 ---
14-00000

Lo - MEAASAT . . a .
Pee 3 fo ; ar: “

Decretary Of State far Austice Renesa Bot ind, who js a guat fried of ©
> Captata Eesay,' te ta ceria trouble, Sai aves ‘a Dether cf a. turer
Pevetteut of Barts, way lose bie position. Siree be hivssoll tee .
Dowsidertial adritiaas, Bo may becuse @ cat Wate far wake * office Pid
be eurvievs. tes present crisis.’ we -

° prota patesutal rived’ for che. president ts feoretary oC Rtate for —
- Lapor and: Scr ie) wow max A. Antainey ta -clalsa tae + ere, of -
. the labor walans, | :

20. focorting to Vilaira, Ge wildest mmore. are ranpest ts ietts. fr...
. exang eo, even LnteLlignnt peruune give: aradewe to the-allvgaticon thet
' ¢be Us Goverment is not-renlly enzizus to eve the 10nfall of
Mrvaliar acA.that @ portion of the UIQ ullites Litharto elloomted :
: Qo. President Balaguer. of ‘xe Datiaicen. Pugutiin os devoizizent Lous t
=. Vie Passed oa, “wita: tha’ tacit careent of, the U8, to "Balamer's ok
goed Sriand,” Dewlier. Accther manor states that the CIA 1s now ip
the procesa ‘of trefzing daitien axiles is to US fore posethle - .
irvasicn of Gait. - Tar nuns of Ine Younes, s former Savor ta Baits ©
' qd a forasy Ashaceatic: 4: 20 US pow in exile tu Sew form City, has
Dens inguttonet aa cas of tse recetving trniatng tn guerrilla
varture.:

Gee-of Vitaire's eins during hie proaent w1ols ‘to tho ‘te to -
convince influential Battia: exiles thet Ciariee ta sot e Dawmlier
. Pepporter A tat bi wads wis 6 geod presidents Viletre hes |
@lrew’y contacted, through Bw, Loate fensariog, @ yroatnant antic.
‘Bwvaller exile any Bem FO SENT ema Bagen So mere eters evile-
Jesters. . .

| frei stati: theh the envy acyulated representative 6f the WP
(Wasted Bstions bevelopsest Progres) ia Porteard rine, o Oresk,
Bae just setureed tu har tok ani atated that be Vill act oo basi 80.
* Hinged Deqese an. discwverec thet: fue granted uy the EDP vere -
“adeayprepeiated: ty to Duvalter yovernanct.” sos

Drm alee qsbertel, that.o ergensueticn omyrivel <6 UW attteens
nd galling iteel? ae Docelarty for mister will Uy, to reine sone
for “eatritac, stication.. ricuesetetion, altural end onunante -
Gerelogmnte:'in mast.” jonas, Walts's qnestatcr' ts, the 08,
fe eenmiected with tate-onjantoation. an CAs DideLan: ta: Seared te
De in PorteenPrinte. ‘Wiin Wate Ned Vocus LL tee on test ..

Belt te ettecaap persons mawecting: (ae porteny ‘tr ca
Baits te ettectad.

o



--- Page 199 ---
14000000 +

Meat : i oo Wye eer Pe oo Lo a
7 . = , oo, Pages |, re
; | WW. Bytrwer Lote Levee, a-marber of tho Maitian mmveie Planning oe i
_ | | Beard emt ® clows friuné of Ovaries’, le aipactat ly Mew Yor’ au oF : ee
boo ebot 29 Mey 67 ostenstuly te. discuss yort Awvalepmet projects of ‘ ’
, !  PortewPrisce vith the J. @. Mite Boginesring Uorooration, G0 Bru 3)
- i -: BO . Bae reel purpose of his. visit, however, 1. te comect US ‘ : :
: Io : frteoke en Matias exiles ta 0a effort to emis auppart for Guarlens : _ a
. - feo. co . ~
: Soe " Goemine ant Brus talbet iin the phone 12 May 67. ‘The banter stated. ” a oe
- _, : © Crabbe be, “tied doen" Seen eee ia and of Maz, ot es Lo. on
. Waid tims be way coke ecothar bustness trip to te-UZ, des ° Lot, we
My Bows ta firmly convinced that Castles his alreaty mle tn decteion Po
me . no to overtaray the Auvalier 4nermemt with Nin: fries ani thes be *: ‘ poy
: ee seat act fast to prevent chece axe & povslbla Ctemiatet tatooover, f :
Loe tO .. Walaure ent. on wirew che’, Une palitical.end sooasalo. vitaation ” al me a



--- Page 200 ---
14-0000

whe ae aN bbe ey 7

ae
pe
-

tn Si

-

oh



--- Page 201 ---
14-0000

TRICE, Lo 2 as 196Tee

Beetle ate, ‘ my ia

$oue nanifer ,
su La Revosntyon Araliers tases, led force: wives
:

on cour doaner, | & cette cd. curation
te.” :

Bt pourguolyid ‘oca o/! donne i Ltappertunicé dtievarer,
: ae employee do votse ant: 9 dou 3 apporter sux ousal dour wn
‘eptdusimn sutvunt ie barber s aropres: se .

1 Tos. 5.00:
. J Visedes eGtna GS
Varden ¢ Gen 15,09 - -, .
Me ' Gina’ 25. M0: _

,t 2 aut geate ae Gentrect ad :
a Ltengdso ‘Annouant steam tes

Len wa. eure anes roouelll sea, par vos going, sovont
aoavertiog on ahéyues « i'orteco ae@ la Soordtairarie G'Evat 363.
Pinunnes ot too. Affairag Economiques, acocapigrios co ta late -
AT PA. Perannne) ot iraramiaes en _Mpartement ; “du Coamorer 0% .



--- Page 202 ---
r400000

a _ , Set ft Hate,

fF, Nevins ~ Bee Loy = Boat G

sree ta Ven.

we Ry ! as ie

Aa 62a Rioale ~- fovidve eg

oe . > t

. dy Shape - B venecX Gin Foensctte firs ; 2. inte -

. De Hecke - Ecenentty ee -
; Sel Ret tree Eve Te “We th BKS Soy -

me eQ
i WBowe as Re Bnet SY ve tag Ase Oe; ver Vaiee a

ay Hick: wo , a
all v: a fe Cate b

necol oe



--- Page 203 ---
14-0000

Case 47,540 (Reopened) New Developments in Plans of Haitian Banker,
Glemard Joseph Cherles to Overthrov the Davalier Government

; a ase
GQhief, Kew York Field Office JIBalog/br) we 15 May 1967.

"> 48 088 (esata)

Pa

t

BO/- 357029.

te



--- Page 204 ---
14-0000

eee senna

Wr-h19-67

5

1

1,540 (reopened)

Case

BUBYEC?: Nev Developuents in Plans of Haitian Banker, Clenaré Joseph =. |
Cries, to Overthrow the Duvalier Goverment . coe



--- Page 205 ---
14-0000

.

.
oe

|

Page 2—

‘Yeriquin, who was. sn charge of the TIM in the Paticnvitie section of ,



--- Page 206 ---
14-0000)

RY-419-67
Page 3 .

Secretary of State for Justice Rameau Estimé, who is a good friend of

Captain Tessy, is in serious trouble. Bs » & brother of former

president of Haiti, may lose his positi:m. Since he hivself has .

presidential ambitions, he may became a. candidate for thie office al
he survives the. present crisis. = :

snothar potential rivel for whe presidency fo Secretary Gf Stata for oS
Vee deber Glass nares Mat As Antoine, yoo claine she suport’ of .
the labor unions,

: Aocording to Vilatre, ‘he wildest rmors are repent 1 mitts; ‘for -

epee
oR tne bh,
4 Magee a



--- Page 207 ---
14-0000

chained " we ro
'
Wrhip-er
men a
Louis Levequo, a uenber of the Haitian Brconte P:
and a cloce friend. of Charles’ :


--- Page 208 ---
14-0000

"Wht ssers rena wom aang le Sai gettin a ketewa tty mAN rE Ra NT

a EDVIL OEDMON D VILAT ek
Sts COMMISSION ACENT

SHIPPING SERVICE
- 0 BOX 916

; 0+ PORT-AU-PRINGE, HAITE



--- Page 209 ---
14-00000

te rate a REY
pt THNe Mies wana Sf MERLE HVT nD a

NERS Renee nant ny Te he Bn

. . i.
me | DEPAR. GHENT DU COMMERCE BT DD LYTNDUSTRIE - i
ae | pt
. . tL a
« { ;
~ - PORMAUSPRINCE, Lo 2 Mat 1967.= ; r
. f 4
_ Uesetcure, a, .
: : ers
' aoe .
*sves 82° L'AN K co la Révolutzon Suvaliéristes, les forces viveg =? ard t
ae la Nation se sont assocides pour donner b cotte odlébraticn . a a

(toute a ‘anpiour qutetie mirdto. : oe , : i

4.cot hommage five la fation tient & rondre b Son Véndcd- ve, |
De sient A Tse, Son Brru.t- nee Le Dooteur Frangods SUVALIEA, i.
tigne chef de la. Revelut tony 2b est Icuable que le Cemmerce et:
. rm Reuse trie:.pportent leur. part “aipation effective...

: - Te . AL ogsauson den grsadsoous tiantfostations ooaménora~
_ Co, C'est pourcuoi,i] oua ut donné ‘Ltnppersundté a anvieer
: . Yee employds de votre-ant: prise 4 apporter eux ousad deur cnr
_ wribution, suivant le barbi~ ct-aprds :
: - bo $B. 20 s-urdon 1 Odes §.00°

Se 201° & 500 + ardes §¢ Gdas 10.00 -

De 502° 215%) urdes 1 Glos 15.00: - :
2% partie 16°2501 © _* t Gfas’ 25.90, .

11 demours ‘entendu qu'dl est laiasé vous indivicusl= © -
Lement, aincd qu’A votre haut personnel, la Liberté d'accen-
plir cout geara do etnérosits, le Plefont- as JA: contributian,
en l'erpece donourcat ALL imi té. >

‘Les valeuro ainad Poouedllies par ves’ poins, ‘geront
“ eonvertics en cheques & llordre de la Seordtaivorde a'Etat des
- Pinances et tos Affeires Boonemiquea, accompagries co la liste

votre personne) et transaiaea au Département du Commerce ot

thee waddue : 6.

 yertes, Hensieura, Lassurence do oy “eegatadrasion
tincuse.

+s eneereendioaana So acknaeter!



--- Page 210 ---
14-0000

eee re eee, 2 eee ones.

Mss £ File 6 Harllee, woe ~ Pend =o at com Soni

ston ia On:

aa Pal R We. - Goa der 0 Rrsrtcan Aste [

De Simpsen -. E once Cn Ree ' Cea’
Dr, ae _" Beonemt tt * 1 Be _

ee! Soe meen ae. se mime

; Dr. Geese kag hehe, Osteen Daweh, 2 Rt
be Denby = 7 2 Te a “Sve
When - | Develop vHrch eb

TTS Om ek eee cent ee cee rmemee ee ns

vevee” | Mogren. _

Ae Se "baadk re

i

_ - Cel, King=, Retined, Exe Toe ‘Lah, Eek. Sentes. ae .

enemy |

rn I Digs - Moro/ pr Snider us 4 Fs ;



--- Page 211 ---
14-00000

GUBJECT: Plas of Haitian Banker Clemend Joveya Charles to Overthrow
. tha Duvalier Goveranent = Case 47,540 (Ne-opened)  -

tat 196 oe A on Intron i, Bw Zot _ ren a
city, herniated tae folloving inforastion... 7 poe

2. Be anf Clenerd Joseph Cherles, President of the Banigas Commeretate ”
D*Haitt end President of the Comber of Commerce of Haiti, have discussed. =
fn detail tie possible overthrow of the Duvalier Government in the near |
future. During his visit to New York City in the first week of May, 1967,
: -eehoms -

further

-in Haiti.” In addition he will tiave, ‘through his good friend Colonel —
Catllard, Chief of tha Haitian Const Guard, three-Haitisn boats wader .
his cuntrol. Caillerd,. who. enjoya the. confidence of Duvalter, . dea ot:

: an Charles 10. eti21 pretending’ to:be oi sporter of Duvalier, ©
Bovever, be feels that hie life ts now in Oteikes.. -
- Piet, teen vay. fall. victia ‘to the President, His position hes-becone .:
chakey, In-eaviy 1957, at Duvalier's request, he submitted: a merorandus --
@o the President describing te wrong. doing of Henri Siolait,-who is in.
one of the Regio ¢a Tahan and Des ALLumetten: (tobacas. ond ‘watoh. industry),

Lene!


--- Page 212 ---
14-0000

eo

but {6 appeare that Duvalier took. Siclait's side. “According to ‘curtee,
- Bielait hee been;eucoessful in raising money for Duvalier: and also hed.
~ peautiful homes built for some of the President's key. Supporters, :
ea Us dabaasodng 2a Pech coerringy te mmmrenma cn Staats
" thd US Anbassator in Port-au-Prince, —

5. Authough.be hes relationships. vith the 05 diptonstile. service ta
| Officer from the US". tect ty aloe in ortcoutrisee tanta

: @lininsting the Ruvalier clenents ond ‘the Commmiste and
_ @ "liveral “Te be falta to recetve VS help’ in Bis

: cient vith the planning, but the exemrtion of bis: cabana will tebe.
more tine, . :

10. (Reopened):

Purt-au-Prince, Charles expressed his desire to “cooperate vith a Liaison

6. earn te cnet Yn ren wel pole,



--- Page 213 ---
14-0000

pe ct CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY a ge

‘This material contains information affecting the Naticnal Defense of ihe United States within the meaning of the Raptonsze Lawa, Title
BRIG. Ses nd tbe emcamieion oF Foruation of which in Any manner to 60, un wuthorised person Gerwe, be penbibited Oy law.

ee B-E-C-R-E-7 . : ae .
. NO FOREIG) N DISSEM a - .

_ COUNTRY Haitd - ~ nePORT. NO, = CS-310/05457-67
4 SUBECT Efforts by Haitian Civilians "DATE oISTR: .- 10 May 1967
, dnd Miltary to dain Pover . ; : “
4 Ta Heltian Government - : _ NO. PAGES 2° “ .
i REFERENCES a ~ j
& DATEOR April 1967 ‘ ‘

: :. INFO, #6 a ; ! fe
g  PUCEA : a a 4 ‘
«DATE _ACQ. 28 Apri: 1967 FIELD REPORT NO. . ”

: : THIS IS UNEVALUATED INFORMATION, SouRcd OMADINON At DEFINITIVE, APPRAISAL OF CONTENT 15 TENTATIVE, Ca
: .

" SOURCE A foreign busizeseuan vho has lived in Haiti for a nuber of years ant .
: . por dors. pereieha Pem-edbe rie ory ot the Haitiar. Gcrarnment.. He is

; Batttan Goverment official. me

PLN

pt Mattians Clenard Joseph Charles’ and Herve Royer are contenting for pover
in the Haitian Goverument, and each has hopes of succeeding Presicent
Francois Duvalier.,- Although they are working together ‘and will-join —.
forces in order to get-rid of Duvalier, they Brcbabjy wi start fighting
: between themselves once this objective is. obtained.

@. Solonel: Jacques Laroche ie the military's ‘primary contender for power, _*
_ end undoubtedly he will be the one to consolitate-a military movement
against Duvalier. Since the @iomissal of high-ranking military officers —
Fens enna tae ay en reemees 196s aroha baa enjoyed the erentant
"power within the: Amy.” na

og Be buralier is atssaninatd, it in 1tkly that there vil) te Wootsbed in -
., the strests.. Tn this-event, it would be: the Army who would atep in sO

wee bee

dumediately and contro) the situation.’ ‘Despite the fect that. thé Amy .
ie omall ond weakened fron its loss of high-ranking offficers, at stil

" However, if Duvelier dies a natural death there would 'ba-les@ chance of
. Rostilities Sree hn ens nd orale wold ave oer .
hance:of teking powers | Bou .

“

~ be, There ts Little chance: thet: falar will step down frai power voluns’
.. ardly ° pride. However, in this mecvea’ nis fenidy,



--- Page 214 ---
14-0000

Headquarters Conmeuto 0
1. Charles ia president of the Commercial Bank of Haiti, and Boyer
_ ' ds a former Minister of Finance under Duvalier. Another source,
a i - . ; whose reporting has been infrequent, but considered reliable, has
o 7 - reported that Boyer has signed’a contract to work with en interna-
. . a . tional organdzation in Europe. ’-If toyer leaves Haiti, it 1s possible
Tepe : yo, that he will forego his anbitions for power in the Haitian Govern- :
. ; ° nent, or that his endeavors will be hampered seriously by bis
: ebeence from the country, 69 0 le oo,

a
oa 2. Leroche is Deputy Chief of Staff of the Haitian Armed Forces, His.

Lon mo, mo. ) enbitious and corrupt character, and his overtures tovard Duvdlier,
: | '  godng General Gareri Constant, Chief of Staff of the Haitian Army.
. . For diographic information on Laroche see: CBLM-313/00918-67.

SGRRNTITE re
Bn Aah oy:

wre one
Mae ately

Prk puns net


--- Page 215 ---
14-0000

“AHO

; CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY wy AS 16 2G
‘Tuts motertal contains information effecting the National Defense of the United States within ths meaning of the Espionage Laws, Title
18, 0.8.0. Gece. 103 and 704, the \renemission or revelation @f whieh tn any manner 9 an unsutheriaed person wt pronibited “7 law.
AE-C-R-E-T
_. : __NO FOPSIGN DISSE CONTROLLED DISSEM
" COUNTRY Hait4 : neront NO. eson-gi2/0nhe8.6t
f° SUBJECT Plans of Clemara Joseph Charles, "Date piste, 28 May 1967
& President of the Commercial Bank . , : .
; Of Haiti, to Overthrow the “NO. PAGES = 2 :
Duvalier Government : *
: . / REFERENCES woe ,
DATE OF - Ear: 196 : : . pe .
. INFO. ay May 7 oo 7 : :. we a
_ § paces . vo — ; \ '
} DATE ACG. _(9 May 1967) _ “FIELD REPORT.NO._-
g THIS 1S UNEVALUATED INFORMATION. Sounct ORADINOS ARE DEFINITIVE. APPRAISAL OF CONTENT 1S TENTATIVE.

. t source =A foreign dusiuessman with wide contacts in Port -au-Prinée. Source:
J Lo Yeports infrequently, but his information is believed to be reliable. :-
. Re reenived. the informatica fron a ® person close to Charles.

we

'

i.

seize pover with his militery und civilian friends’
or without the hélp ‘of the U.S. Government.’ If he fails in his efforts -
- to cbtain U.S. support for his plan, Charles still intends to go ahead
. With the plot, but he said the execution of his scheme will take more’ .'”
time.' However, Charles beiieves:that it is in “he best interest of the .. -
Duration sho bas brug Hasek to tha briny of feel Secnmic ecliapecr?
‘Duvallier who has brought Haiti to the brink of totel \econcric collopse ‘

®. -Charles said thet he has rifles and hand grenates hidden “sé te pa eee Bae
Raiti" and that through his gcod friend. Colonel Octave Cayard,’ commander . 24 ~

I)
&

the Haitian Coast Guari, three Haitian data, which carry cannons, :"
: ay
4 : .
3 4 ef ,
J A
ARS 3

mae
47
hem

. é :

wciing ir hia signs to”

a

eS 7 a
dated to tha



--- Page 216 ---
14-0000

§-E-C-R-E-T
NO FOREIGN DISSEN/ CONTROLLED DISSEM

a ° como. ste/ouhn-St-

Charles has stated that should he become President of Haiti, ke would
. , Yareue a pro-U.8. policy, eliminating the Duvalierists and the Communists
- and establishing a "liberal democratic” regime. :

Charles sti31 is pretending to te a loyal supporter of Duvelier; hovever
his position hes become shaky ana he believes that his Life is in danger. .
Be feels that ho may fall victim to Duvalier unless he (Charles) strikes a .
first. For the time being, Charles will continue te support Duvalier in» ~f
er. effort to aliny the President's suspicions. As president of the * 4
Haitian Chanber of Commerce, Charles: eoon will deliver a speech praising A
the achievements. of Duvalier. He is anxious for the U.S. to know that . :
Me overtures toward Dryalier ere pretense and thet be 1s. determined to.

60 into action against the present ‘regime.

(8~311/05457-67,. from another reliable source, : reported that Charles end

Herve Boyer, Fee een ere ercs Vales Davelier, yere comtenting |
for power in the Haitian Goverment... .

“de “Ba the past soveral nonths, Chariee has ite ‘nimerous attengte to
‘ elicit support Fee eee ee Sennen for his Flos
.-; Sgainist the Duvalier Government. - . :

 &e ‘Ro reason was given for Charles" belief’ that would be in the deat. -
_ dxtereat of the U.3. to support his schemes to overthrow Duvalizr.
. However, he way be referring to his claim that should he become :

Comer; Cayard, who enjoys the confidence of Duvelier, is
Cy of Charles. Oo BOs Saeed s -



--- Page 217 ---
14-0000

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

: ‘This material contains tnformation affecting the National Defense of the United S:ates within the meaning of the Expionage Lat
on + 28, 0.8.0, Bova. 183 and Tet, the trangmisaion or revelation of which in any manner to en unauthorised person ts prebteited Dy Ld ed .
4 8-E-C-R-E-T te
NO_FOREIGN DISSFM/CONTROLLED DISSEM_. ,
Country Haitt REPORT NO, CS DB=312/01625-67

sueect Further Plens of Clemari Joseph Charles ~ pati: DISTR. -8 June 1967
To Overthrow the Haitica Governmant¢ OO
His MiLitavy Supporters and His Bids - NO, PAGES 3
For Support from Haitian Elles - . i

se noeqe nen nnipine ae

REFERENCES /
DATE OF Mid-late May 196' an _ . CE
INFO, 7 woo ; a ot ’
DATE ACQ. (15, 22°May 1967) ‘ : FIELD REPORT NO. . :
THIS, is UNEVALUATED. INFORMATION, SOURCE GRADINGS ARE DEFINITIVE. APPRAISAL OF CONTENT 1S TENTATIVE, .
- source, A foreign businessman - with wide contacts in Portenu-Prince owho: kecbelieved. Ao.
fepors accurately wiat he leamis. “This "informstitn was ‘obtained. froma alese — _
a _ frien af Ghssie® wie, pechally was ewere Anat At'wolna zeech Uf; affictala, a
+ . t .

a Clenart Joseph Charles rifan ot the Camaratal Denk of Hatt, sina Pa
: that since Maj. Coico” 1 a close friend, has replaced Capt. Harry _
Tagry in the Presidential Quart be (Charles) oow bas on access to ar

feel that 1967.49 the year of deciaion, *.

i Ma obitiied te shtpa of. she tinisten Séash ‘quart, Comtlaa ‘now has tht wee. 1 -
. @ 352~ton converted lanting craft. (IC) vhich normally sails between Jamaies :

y

Uh Seek TOE oY renee



--- Page 218 ---
14-0000

 §.E-C-R-Et
NO FOREIGN DISSEA/ CONTROLLED DISSEN .

Oe ; osns-312/02625-67

Ss. Charles haf no contact with Haitian exile. ‘grows unti2 : early: ‘May 1967, : an
when he sent an emissary to New York City to talk to Louis Baniarica, a
prominent anti-Duvulier extle, vhose entire. family was killed by Duvalier's
henchuene Sansaracy varied tu suppors Charles ina final shovwiow with :
Duvalier and promised to line up sone of his “fellow extloe to supers

| Badtdan, Anbeseator - k 8-0 -cdaphamatia ip
:. , Strongly pro-U.8. Sles regards Gerard Philtppssux, ‘Minister of Health,
a os a very sick man vith no furthev political erpiratioas

"Gatoon may be Haje Serge Coleus ve
“Probably Ut obs Lue Plerre-Touts, . :
‘Ant our hs ketal rer ae Gag Water Prema

Be FORETON tm vom _



--- Page 219 ---
14-00000

bh. Probebly Dr. Gaston dmelle, Cae . a |

3- Probobly Henri Vixanar. - se ‘ - ~

_-  $80B6322/0LN28-67 recently reported other plans of Clemant Joveph Charles, «|?
,

“4 oo

Pretty ae td
Paine

ee


--- Page 220 ---
14-0000

eee ae SECRET ©
peste Qa een ee cere [PEAR Um ROPE ERD

tT rr

AVANCE COPY

dl 2 GR copy ae yrere = erred
tans hard 2a, Hu Et +Eill 2-< (oF) SAGs BY, foe

SECR t t e52s06z GHTE, uNwave® mez. oo

DIRECTOR. INFO PORT AU rriwje, bo. BASE/U. YORK Me , Sg
“ QWUNTON EVLOFT : re

REF DIRECTOR. uss
BL UFGT. osee. a
os ow a MAY Mer, EvLOFT=1 LEARNED ‘FROM. ‘CONSUL. EUGENE :
“WAXIMILIEN THAT “CLEMARD JOSEPH, CHARLES: 1S. IW WEW YORK. city»
° artfnetina BORROW: MONEY OW GOH OND ACCORDING To MAXIMILIEN,
PRESIDENT DUVALIER "HAS" “SWBTRUCTED CHARLES, Te “ADVANCE: ($30,000 ”
FROM OMA (SOCIAL SECURITY) FUNDS. FOR, PURCHASE” OF” CARS
FOR: TOURISM DEPARTMENT. Mhreuien STATED tat Ue ;HOUGH ‘OWA’
SUPPOSEDLY Has $425,000 IW CASH,” CHARLES “WASHALREADY ADVANCED
$129,000. ant CANNOT PEND. ENOUGH -CASH ‘To MEET: DUVALIER'S®.
MEQUEST. BECAUSE. ‘OF. THIS, CHARLES 18. SCARED TO" RETURW. WATE:
PECIALLY IF. PRESENT WzW’ YORK "WEGOTIATLONS FALL. ° “CHARLES is
LS0 WORRIED THAT-HE. Hay WOT-BE: ABLE DEPART: wabtne .
| AKIBILLES aso. Bao THat FRITZ GREGER, DUVALIER:.
OusLE- SHOOTER, WOW EN. NEWYORK ARD WAS. LNVOLVED: aw. COUNTERS
ELTING. HALTIAW STAMPS AND: ‘HONEY AND HAS. ‘BEEN BANISHED’ FROM.
1th EVLOFT= 1 OPI NES THAT KIS -BTORY. FaLse. ano: “gReaer” eee

6.



--- Page 221 ---
14-0000

rn

PAGE 2 UMWAVE 7857 SECRET
ACTUALLY. 18 ilew YORK OBTALN INFO HAITLAN EXILES.
Se UMWAVE FORWAROLNG UNDER REF B COPY OF DOCUMENT PRE-

JPAREO- BY PRESIDENT OF BANK-OF HAITI,. ANTONIO ANDRE ;. FOR

—TREAGER BROS AND ASSOCIATES, - AiAME EXPORTERS, wis H OUTLINES .

FLWANCEAL SITUATIOW OF. “WALT. AS OF 26 DECEMBER i966.” EVLOFT~i-
_OBTALNED DOCUMENT ‘FROM -TRAEGER BROS. WITH.WHOM HE HAS. PERSOMAL
“GONTNGT:  TRAEGER BROS! APPARENTLY APPROACHED FOR: HELP 10 PROT

“posts: doh $2. AILLIpS Bown. ISSUE, BUT’ ips. wot RESPONDED.
~ pocuntilt ¥AS PASSED TO: STATION OM + mie
"de RNDEX CHARLES, _ontatn, AWORE

. .

~ THE



--- Page 222 ---
1400900

. @ May 1967 - | os

MEMORAMDUM FOR THE RECORD. o Se ar
“ SUBJECr ' Pelephone Conversation. with Genevieve .
So, ~ Alyea. {rsesetic ce Contact. Service

: Clomard: Joven CHA

1. at 1600 hours, 26: Apraa 1967, Genevieve ‘Alyea, pes, ~ AL
(Green Phone 3024) relzyed the Sollowing. message to the under-
Gigned, re Clemard Joseph CHARLES. :

2. Today the DCS Headquarters received: “the: “following
: teletype. from: Mr. BALOG, New York City DCS representative,”
‘fron Luis A. BRUN, President of BAB International Corporation,

. Now York (Caty.. mo,

a} . Haiti's ‘financial pituation ‘now y catastrophic

. All efforts. by President: DUVALIER. to attract foreign
CG. capital have failed. Dossatic financial resources

.. @xzploited through throats, extortion, etc.: are rapidly

8 ing up and unless the Government re: ves foreign:

. te Pe it facce complete financial : ruin

_ ‘B. In another effort to. raise money, abroad,’ DUVALIER:

“- gave. permission to Banker Clenard ‘Joseph CHARLES: te.

- waedt. the United. States and contact hie business =

» 2pfends there. (See Cason 40570 &- 46576)... CHARLES’.

- Visit to the U.S. is .scheculed on. oy: about. 9 May 1967,
%. which tise he will contact. ‘his: business partner, Le,

Soeeph DRYER. so mine ao

’ yegeives 0.8. help." BUN. wiht fly: ‘to: Hiani to
aaa 8 and wiil, in tura, tell: “Capt. BALCG”: Stout
- She vesults of CHARLES’ efforts.  ..



--- Page 223 ---
14-0000

SORT

8. There is a possibility that CHARLES will also cone
to New York City. If.he does, BRUN and Capt. BALOG will 1
(discuss the latest developments with hin, - SR

4. During the past few cays, CHARLES and BAUN have been .

in almost daily telecommunications, ostensibly discussing -
_ | business matters. Using certain code words previously ‘agreed.

_ upon in pergon, CHARLES is able to tell BRUN about..the recent :
g@ituation in Haiti without arousing the suspicions of Haitian "
phone censorship. Parts of the information contained in : :
Paragraph 1 was received from. CHAALES vy. “BRIN during: their tele
conversation on. 25 | April. 1967... fi.

wes R. ms Scoy

" Genevieve Alyea stated she would obtain ‘Goptas’ of the DCs oo
reports referred to in Para. 2-3 above ‘and call. ithe. waltt .
Desk on 27. ‘April 1967, - . : .



--- Page 224 ---
14-0000

/ SECRET

fo A. Basic Points To Be Stressed:

} : 1. ‘The U.S. Government cannot make any connitnent. of

!
3 uy 1967
Ae - , ; ; ‘
a Requirenenta for BALOG Contact With Clemard Joseph Charles oe
L . . me ; . J
support to Clenard Joseph Charles, ek

4 ae * @ ‘Clenard Charles: should not infer, imply ‘or boast: an nD
yo. of U.8. support. in his attonpts. .to gain support for. bis: Tg . .

project. The. U.S8.G. does not wish to be accused: of ~ |

overthrowing other governnents. oe ’ ; ,

3. Charles should be. told, however, that. any information
' * geoncerning his plans, intentions and movexents will not

under any. circumstances be divalged to the GOH nor. to
other countrynen of his. - - .

4... Baleg. and his. frie ‘are ‘definitely interested: ‘in.
Charles’ activities and inform tion he can. provide.
relative to the Situation. an the latter's. country.

Specific Requirenents. Relative. to- His Plans. ‘Bince be:
- Claims to Have Certain Capabilitics:

2. .What etonente or: groups within the GOH, the military |

and. police do you have actually: counitted to your plan

of overthrowing Pape Dos (Duvalier)?. .

8.. Give the strength, of each group?: _Fanes. of: leadere?
a ‘When do you plan to execute your, projet —

_ 4. Sow do you-intend to tiandle the ettuition with: regard. "

- to the Presidential Guard, the: Deasalines, - trooge. and the . an

police in Port au Prince? af :

B, taythe,cymostion of your saben what so-the extent

eg vielence foresesn?.
"6." Went: connsction: ¢o. you have with. exttes: and. where?

Be In case decide to: net vould notify Mr. Brun
beforehand? you:netity iar

sit



--- Page 225 ---
14-0000»

> SEORET

8, ;

Other Requirements; :
1. What ie the true evaluation of Papa Doo’s health?
2. Who are his personal doctors? | —— ;

3. In view of the deteriorating econony of the country

-€9 you think Papa, Doo will step down and depart? :

4. What is the reason or circunstances. gor the recent |
Gionissale and transfers of junior officers within the

. military? :

S. In a struggle for power what, would be the situation
between Lt Col linx Dominique and Luc Youroard? Are

_ these two individuals part of your schome?
. 8. What part would Gracia Jacques, Luc Desir, Clovis

inor, Gerard Philippeaux. and General Constant play

_ 2 case Pape Doc goes or there. 1s a pover struggle?

“7.” What part would the peopie outside of Port au Prince

lay in'an attenst of an overthrow? What groups in the
anterior and other cities would begin Zighting each .
other at this juncture? soe te,

'


--- Page 226 ---
14-0000

"; Square Motor Inn, Suite 1002-1003,
-@ May). when he. plans: to go. to Washington.

QR ipterview with Capt. BALOG, flew. back to HAL’ yesterday. -

SECHE
1 May 1967
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECCAD.. ; ae oo.
SUBJECT _’ 9: Telephone. Conversation with. Genevieve / ca
: , . ALYEA, DCS; re Clenard Joseph CHSRLES | :
. , a at oe te . ; ad
fo.

8

2.” At 1830 hours, the DCS Has. representative, Genevieve

' “ALYEA (Green phone 3024), relayed the following message received .
*,',, this date: frog the DCS New: York office, Mr, : BALOG:. oe ,

2. The "EARL" refered to in ny previous nessace ie Bark:

” SMITH, former U.S. Ambassador to Cuba and a friend of the; 0

. KRWNEDYS. SMITH, who was approached. by: Joseph DRYER, florida: oN
. .. Qusinessaan, to tae Haitian banker Cleaard’ Joseph: CHARLES: aan

, to the State Dopartmut, ‘refused to do. -In turn, DRYER --
- ., COntacted- Paul ROGERS,

Congresenan from Florida,: who agreed. ~

" 0 talk with Sonator Ted KENNEDY. According to Luis A. BRUN, —-
. . MBNNEDY agreed to auke an’ appointment for CHARLES at the State }  .
-,. Department. Te ;
3. last night (presumibly 30 April), CHARLES flow from | /

- Port au Prince to: New-York City. He is staying at the Lincoln |

8U-7-6800, until Wednesday
Mian :.

7 4.. “Alec, last:night, Luo Albert: FOUCARD, son<in-1
@f President DUVALZER who is Minister ef ‘Tour:

arrived in New York City, | They are staying. at:
Astoria, EL.5-3000, © 7

and-his wife.
the Waldors. oo.

G,. Allan COLTON, part owner of Haiti Intersationnl=
Lesther » -FOxt Gu Prince, @ Cunnd4an national who ¥ jussted-

Ge told: us (cco) chat: his efforts: to @0ll- Haitic: treasurg:- -
bonds in. the United uéttes and Canada.were unsuccessful, =

ss

Sen

.
i
4 ;
?
’
.

-w me ‘ ~


--- Page 227 ---
14-00000

Staten 8 & 1. ~ addressee.

~ geener

25 April 1967

MEMORANDUM FOR: Mr. Melville Osborne
: so SBA/CAR
Departuen*. of State

. per our telephone ‘conversation there follows a
copy of the measage fron. Ambassador TIHMONS, - dated
22 April 1967, concorning Clemard Joseph ‘CHARLES: - :

"Aw Department and CIA Washington | well |
' @ware, CHARLES has inordinate. anbitions and.
“- hae eeveral tines in. past taken siatlar Line,
In my judgaont he is again fishing ‘to see ig.
be can attract some form of U.8.. Government
Support. We sre. most. circusspect , here in | _
Gealing with CHARLES and I am sure’ .wehington

“.: {6 handling in wase fashien. -Anbassador. anks:

this necesage be. shown to LOKG Land OSBORNE,”
. ARA/CAR, State.” . -

4

- WH/7/Haiti Chrono
~ Clemard: Joneph CHARLES. ie

,



--- Page 228 ---
14-0000

| 24 April 1967

. MEMORANDUM ‘FOR THE: RECORD

SUBJECT:. Telephone Conversation with Gerievieve Awan,
Domestic Contact Service re CLemard ard Joseph CHARLES
(201-357029).

1. At 1500 hours, 21° April: 1967, ‘Wiss “Genevieve:  ALYEA, :
. Domestic Contact Service, X3026 (Green. Phoné 3024)‘ called tie
" undersigned to inform the. Haiti Desk. of comments.:made on a
teletype message from their: DCS représentative in:
City, Mr. BALOG. — According to Miss ALYEA , -- M
. dnterviewed a U. 8. businessman who travels ‘requently- in. :
'. Latin American (later identified’ as. Luis’ BRYN), on.conditiona . _
ain Haiti, Mr. BALOG had teletyped the report’ to pcs Headquarters,
and had added the. . following comment at, the - end ‘of - .

- "On. 20 ‘April, Mrs BALOG - ‘tn New: York. Cit:
.wiewed the source (SRUN). © The source visited Port
during the latter part of February 1967."
‘as. tho ‘guest of CLEMARD JOSEPH CHARLES. (P;
Commercial Bank of Haiti)..: Source, who mainta ti feaepnone | .

f o--' ° gnd cable contact with CHARLES," is convinced. the yatter .
ces (CHARLES) has decided with his unnamed Army-fr

., overthrow’. President DUVALIER now.. Sourcesays. CHARLES had.

asked his U.S. business. partner, . Joseph -DRYER,:: Pain. ,

Florida (Home phone: 655-2610;: Buainess phone - 832-6331) and

another person identified as "EARL" &

op
orewmaes the, u.8, Government that CHARLES, who
- gespirations, now“haa tho power and: ‘determinatio
- of DUVALIER. CHARLES, who now fears. for his life
- gon: to New York City a few weeke: ago’ for a medion,
and advieed him to remiin. in the u. 5.0.

- ue juestion: What’ is- your aesessuent of. © pitas thoun
a SFE orientation or lack. of: ons and
. heiy general outlook for. the: future?.



--- Page 229 ---
14-0000

Pou

SECRET _— -f.
Ze

Source Anwer: - Students, as well as ‘eduoated. persons, :
: listen’ regularly to two tureign radio: .'-..
_ broadcasts -- one emanating from the United.
- States and one from Cuba‘. The Cuba station, -
: which emphaoizes Comsuntat ideology,” appears"
* ..t0 be popular with 't Ante.ligencia and :
students while the " =i-the street" - AO
..prefers the U.S. broadcasts, ° — .

3. , Mr. BALOG _then commented regarding paragraph 2 above
. 88 follows: =

: “The radio station's ‘nent toned. ‘above. is Located . somewhere
-. in ‘Maesachusetts, according to our source and Nis: Haitian friends
“in New York City. ‘The: believe it. is a CIA operat

°” 4.> Glemard’ Joseph CHARLES" Arny_ friends wentioned above” a
may possibly include. Jacques LAROCHE, - Deputy Chies. of Staft. oe

“ - 6 At 1630 hourn, “the ‘indersigned: contacted Mise ALYEA
to obtain additional information from Mr. BALOG concerning: De.
his interview with BRUN. Unfortunately, Mr.. .BALOG put the... .
above message on the teletype and then departed . ‘for the weekend. -

and will not be available for recontuct until -Nenday, 24 April 1967... .

. hina te Vans: Se z
- Wilma Ri VAN-SCOY : - a

. wate a
. Os - 87020- .
: s 1. = WH/7/Haiti Keno file

7 2 = 8649-10



--- Page 230 ---
14-0000

aan)

; woene O ves Ko

“euaseiry Yo rue wos Xi [= Si ceagCUASSrFieo wessnce F sores cones 4?

VO FILE NO.

——

a e OO eer. 10 onance, x SECRET . oe REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
i oustaoy Dee Fléaa2. TTT ee a
3 r .
g e
= ee en
f I ADVANCE COPY, . . A
i . 1p, : a Seo Clore Dhow
" '
. ot -
| MWS ean Buf EAS wlth cayfeent Bat cp eyes nilug
. a . f see .
SECRET 2215222 CITE PORT AU PRIN me ‘
PRIORITY DIRECTOR _ f te
_ REF: DIRECTOR 95276. ; ; Le a
"\ de REF SHOWN TO AMBASSADOR MORNING. 22: “APRIL: i
"2. FOLL FROM AMBASSADOR: AS DEPT AND -WOFACT WASHINGTON a A SS. a
WELL AWARE, CHARLES HAS INORDINATE AMBITIONS AND HAS. SEVERAL TIMES ©
. Ww PAST TAKEN SIMILAR LINE. “IN MY JUDGMENT. HE. 18. AGAIN.
“ FISHING TO SEE IF HE GAN ATTRACT SONE. FORM OF use. SUPPORT.

WE. ARE MOST CIRCUMSPECT: HERE IN: DEALING wit: CHARLES. AND *
I AM SURE WASHINGTON Ig HANDLING IN SANE FASHION. _
3. AMBASSADOR ASKS THIS NSG BE SHOWN To Lone AND OSBORNE, :
[aras CAR, |STATE. .

-SECRE To BE WG srevices ;
ag ms ee “seeany



--- Page 231 ---
14-0000

. ot mot serene oe ee ae
ow + . oan . 2 Ft

oo. - y ;
. % rf f — . ' bebbites fou : c sowtiNS aires ent aN aT
ous, R.LENNAN:81d Sorte

wen WHat . | SECRET
ate . : oe —

tm, 21 April 1867

vo [PRIORITY PORT. AU. PRINCE
mon

g ae . ON a amu, ANOrER: WOFACT “COMPONENT ‘PASSED FOLLOWING |
‘mmo RE CLEMARD JOSEPH CHARLES WHICH OBTAINED cava WHO:
In ALNGST DAILY. CONTACT. WITH CHARLES,” “SOURCE CLAINS HE SPENT
WEEK LATTER ‘PART FEBRUARY as GUEST CHARLES IN Porr. AU PRINCE.

" "gy. SOURCE REPORTED 20 APRIL HE CONVING

D CHARLES HAS DECIDED’
; — DUVALIER NOW WITH AID FIC, “uNWAMED ‘anuer. ‘FRIENDS, SOURCE 7

STATED CHARLES HAD, REQUESTED v.85. BUSINESS. PARTNER. AND ANOTHER a
a Fam v0 GET 1H TOUCH WITH: ‘STATE DEPARTHENT BEFORE BND: OF WEEK”

£0 ar RID or DUVALIER, -

: “SOURCE ‘ALSO ‘REPORTED. — CHARLES, WHC



--- Page 232 ---
14-00000

OMY QUALIFIED OFSK
CAN SUDO6 HHDEXIN

‘sussect ‘ :
Serv eiousl/sontee. with Clenera voserh Cur bea .

PORT AU PRINCE 4342

Reference?

elipmanaiertsuancest Ono Den MAES NEN P08

- 4. On 8 Janury 1467 Subject o,ain mude coutict” with
RACHFILLD. « Gontict wus estiuliznca thrown one of Guuject's
assistents who cume to KaCnheliLu's nome av éEprroximetely 1750 hours .
on 7 *pril 1967. Subject's assivtent udked KaarieL “if he would -

‘like to vorrow some uvcks.on the nistory of suits und if so te
could go to. Guoject's home. enu make & velection,. u.CliviuLu, in

. order to stall ror time. to- arfecs -the: proper coordinzution, steted

-ne would be able to proceed to Suvject'’s nome.the Lollowim, ettcr-

“noon et 1600 hours. On the wornin., of 8 spril HaCiHliLLu touched ; -

bese with botn the Clo end Chief, aU who sereed Muet eaGhe lL Lb\

should go to see Subject. . . : i ow

-- = Qe Subject wes’ - expecting taCiFTELD. and . “ apoloi: ined to :
RaChHFIELD for not proceeding to: ialbhiluLD's home: himself out ékpleined
that he was efreld KaCHFILLD may nove bid ;ucsts, He proceeded to
tell HaCHPl.Lb thet the economy of “siti was in.» duploreble cone
dition end-timt noone can tell the Fresideut’ whet to do, he then
left the roow und returnid 6’ minute leter with “sa cony of "Le hone
iteur", the oillciul tivitian newsréyer, which, ine sul, would not |
be released until. someting tie folsowin.: wees. This ’vnewspe,cr . > 4"
statea that the Haltian Government plens to péy:.or the minting of
newgsilver colns. vsubdject was very upset oectuse, he steced,-tne -
Haifion Government cen.ot efford such . on. expenses: he newsperer

way turned over to-LitUltbe 2 =~ - . -_ a

” Distribution?
- 2eChief, why

SOK ET


--- Page 233 ---
14-0000

* 3 " SPRTCUST NER ara) yr
CONTINUATION OF : . .
“DISPATCH . Bu Gnu. . AVFe2014. (cont)

3e Subject once eyain Pelverited to haUnLLLD thet he was
willing, te answer ény questions. de cise cceved tet te hope
that tie our olny Chier, Larus would Invorm tne -lucomdiy.. caict,
InPUtis thet he le moct wialing vo cooper: te with sLadis ‘Wccuuse he
believes thet tue serverion of his. country acpinds on suci coopers
’ ation. : :

& Cese O'ficer’ Charles arpecred uuch more ut ease
durlny this wi ; € dit tne previous one. Lt upresred
. 266 tulk to semeone aud Knew tn. t-ne
desk the conversation vo bie Guh,
once epjuin, leit tie aoor wide open lor ruture conuver-

weno }): fe5

Owatthew H. chUsB

UM. PREVIOUS ERITON
" RACH FonMD

01-20.0) 704 anD O98

WHICH AR ONOUtTE



--- Page 234 ---
14-0000

CLASSIFICATION
Seeks

: Keference: uIReCrud d531h, 21. burch 1967

1. A dark negro about 517% tall, Clenerd Josenh L. Charles :
was vorn at Gonulves, Haiti, on 21. april 1423. According: to hin-’
self, his ®utoar wes-o professor tnd als mother 6 "simple peasant",
Accordin.; to others he is sensitive soot his orip,ins enu is re-.
ported to hove chenred his Leme _from gaserden vecause of the con=.
notation o% .othin; ness inplicd in thé neme.-- itis retner is ver- ,

- lously reported to neve been » cuerpente: end & peasont. He ree
-ceived his primary educttion et the perochial scuool end graduated -
from the Lycee (ieflrard in. Port’.eu Frince in 143). ~ According, to:,
his own eccount he taughe in rural schools, worked: 6s & putholo- ~ "
gist, upnolsterer, timeskce: er, planvation supervisor, end freée yf,

ance journulist. In 1947 ie wes appointed Controller Generel of -

. uHaltiaa Southern Jenana Industry ena in 1948. beceme: General Agente.

. fhe following yeor he esttblished himself us: Manufacturer's : .

’ Representative anu creeted his own export, and: import, business... |

-.In 1959 he went to ‘London es & member of tne keonomie Mission. of

> the Aeiticn Government, una.in 1954- negotizted: on the Haitian ©

Government's behulr & controct with vile General nlectric Co., g
Ltd. of Coventry, bnglend ror the noderniginy, ena extending, of the.
telecomiunivetions. system of Heitl. He lever said.tnat coth his .

‘ventures into the bansns and telecommunicctions ousinesses were £. :

. unsuccesstul due to politiccl interference. His success story, “
according to a U.S. orlleiel. "apperently inées‘on.the fact tnet *

-he feels.thet he nes schlevid steture.in the community voth- soolelly

‘and politically", - Charles stéves thet: he created “the. Banque- ~
Comercisle a'Haitd (CH) in 1900. and Aes now the sole. owner.

PGoncinued/".

- Dastributlon: -.
2eCulef, wh


--- Page 235 ---
14-00009

CUASSCATION. OAL e arabs Ara

Hk. -2005 (cont)

, CONTINUATION OF

DISPATCH Sueugy

principal orsicer in cherles! Brat
TyoU with Ulirdes. as presioent was an americen citiges in tie
savings ind Louw ocsiness named eDide (Lou), wn wis loser indicted,
Convicucd im. juilea ia tne vadced Jte tus for usin, the mails to
delréud.. anotucr orisinel pertuer of the Of, oe Ceréld },
Can bi, clleyedly frou eniowO, Listnois hos a erindned record
tna verious jell sentences end convictions, swedter calln or
Commolly ire currestiy olenetorles to Gio bank, nor purtners.
ihe vank Is reportea to cave u very poor. portLodic oi soins since, +
accordiiy. to ruwor, tue Louns hive been mede, Lo covernment of fle .
clels on tiv basis cf taeir sipneture aud witnout proper colleteral,
Uesiaes the venk, ue le caso Ludl or Pert owner Of several otier
inducuriot and commerciei euterprlocs in Heivi-and is tue sole
. Pepresentative in wuici or tue Geuerul vlectric vo, utd., London
Suglend, ond tic Glenens cenukert vorke, GCerminy. “e is uireetor: .
of Fort Concession (zrter Nohenud eyed aaperted) and aise Look
over the ol] refinery concession wilcu Ordydueily selomecd to -
Valentine. (wow involved In lludsucion wila alu over their ine
Vestment jueruntee. ) co, .

WHEN the bala wes opened Lu

2. Cherles is Fresident o: tie Chanber of Comncrce, tnd also |
belongs vo severel other commereizl wid civic. orzenizations ine , a
cludins tue Conmittee for tie Rehouilitecion of t..c iural Seetions--
or Haiti, tne Internetionel Cluo o1 Goumerce or likiti, the. Come
merce ind. industry associstion of new York » tnd tic Kotary Cluo. |
(according to a report of serch 1967 ‘he. wes.dropred trom the lest |. .:
Cluv in 1you for noneattendences) 00. me, _

3+ In March 1967 ne wes forecd to give ur his interest in |
_ & number of smaller concerns (Sonutruro, Haitian ‘Tobucco, Haitian
~ Internetional Leather, ete.) out retained his uunopoly of tue ine
“ surauce business end-the bank os well us’ nig -indiv duéliy- owned:
export-import, business. - oO -

4... Although it is obvious that Clemerd:-Joseph Charles, hes,
been @ favorite of Fresident Juva’ “er, the recent changes in
his finencial empire indicete a loss.of trust. ‘the’ economy is .

‘sucn & poor shepe thet Cherlas is hot..meking as much out. of ©;
his enterprises. «nd tne Money aud eredil’ squeeze is hitting him .»
“a@s well as the rese of tue nore honest businessmen in tadti. ag?
syatols olf pust ruvor sherles his. been decorated with the Urder’. ~
of Fetion and dolivar (Commander), the Order. oi. agricultural Merit .-

Conmander), Knight or the national -Urder: "Honor and merit, an
tficer of the. Luvor Order, end Coununder or, whe Civil merit Urder, -

. : t
5e Oné well-iniormed high: United “stetes: official reperted °
| os dn early 1963 thit Chirles was & “gliprery cnaredter™ but that z
“* gome doubt. existud concerudn:: his aaportutice: oF political -Sipnief)
ficunce within the regime. - A few months after this: evtimite was,
mede, Charles conversed with & US ombassy official. | Throughout © oo
their talk he showed an oovious desire Lo aewonstrote hig totel |’.
ditical disdntercst in wae. post while: imulvancously hinting: .
Pnut He could bucome a political tlguro. in-the neur future. He:
- , Med® cuerdou: sictunents uoout the Duveliur regime; unhesiveting
givin: the luprusslow thet ho wea tho“ breuluent!'s*triund both’ < f
through deuilre una hecesulty, Ut thet he definitely did not are”
‘with some of the povurment uy polictus.~ lie etiributed his support:
Of the current. goverment to the fact that: it-woulg. be -dényerous :
fore Hedtlen to withnold dt, ‘The. followiiy. month (hey 1463), .:
‘on & business. trip ce the United Utebes, ‘Cherles told & former us -
dJournelist thet he wes ia a position te buon: hed of & Provisional
government after Vuvaller wes. removed from tie. saunes - ie odbc
expreaved & vellef that the Jreuddent weg realy to institute a. |
Poipn of Gerror rid thet he woe wild. to vocept. wovdut Gide |
dn the oplnodon of tie Journellut, Churles firuly ovbieved thet. (thig
Whos Une thot ahange: for une United Stutus to nolp, eubbulish a”
dewocretia tultl, vrloudiy vowurd the United Utetia, ind weve |.
tre country | lrom a Gautrostype Communlot LuKuovers “Chiriun. suld:
+ bhet Bltiivw be wes on good Lerma with tis ‘euuldent, he felt.

conksiued/ - i

Nines

Yea cravrous teutian
OP ACON Futuna

$18 AN ta ann ante
WHICH ARE CHmLEtE

varie Sins toe hele nen. st


--- Page 236 ---
14-0000

— - ra TasPaTC Smbon araly Fe eens
+ CONTINUATION OF . :
DISPATCH “fh

oe

huFaezuul (cout.)

thet he hud gone cruz; sud must de stopmd store lic liqulacted

~ the opposition, nerds telxed arecly’or his wide rene of support

persents; Lorcivly wtircd, antievuvodier ery Oisicers; Invcilec-

tvels; Journslisus cna susinessmet) ena OF tue promincnt indi vie
duels iho were cutdevbuvelier in veidy tu ovck my, y ove rinent™,
Ne edaed thet ir av dia .ot vecome Provisioned sresldent he would
be sovisrled with tine post ol secretory of rinunce oud ieononie
Affeirs. ln cuaition vo vis heving reeched tne constitutions
ége requirement Lor bresident {..0), Gnerdes ive os enother
quélificetion tue fect cast tie wes of "10U ber cont oleck ordjin,"
noting thet only tos, in chis ci tegory. coulu wit tne presideacy,

6. Gherles seid thet if he were to be Fresiuent he would
“need the "morsel und ceononic help of ‘the Us Government ona peopl"
to trausform hulti ints a true cud prosperous dewocrecy. he noted -
thot ue would need ‘coout i yesr tout dnve efrect his "plun fox
the cconomic und. suciil develorment of Heiti", watch ine tuacd
* the following; poinius creetion of: & o&lencea econony tdapted to:
Heitisou conditions; cna nodernizietion o1 ericulture. He suid '
"thet ne would like to presence ‘this -plin to US o.ticisis Lor their
considerttion, —— . sos : oe ;

« . Charles endeavors to uttract US venture capital for var=
fous Heitden projets cnu clutias tovoe thorou.iiy-pro-United . .
states, He-is report.d to be.un uonovery citizen of vile cluy of
Long, deech, Lon: glia, ew York » baving pronoted & "sister city"
relitiousiip with thet town ind. Fort au Prince; .:in-1y62 he ree
portedly received tue cey to. tne City of sew ork. Ne hes visited .
the United strtes, the United Kingdom end vestern: burope’muny , >
times on ousinesy rips, Tn July:1964 Guerles traveled to hexico -

~ and tue Unived steves;s ostunsioly. vo-discuss- the ésvublisnment of* ~~
& sistl corde Lectory in: eiti, out in reality to outain. 30°
surplus V'-28 treinur ciccritt.e. Vherlés Suvsequently was retorted

to ve atteuptin:- to purchase 24 US surplus, nivel creit for. haiti'g
rmed torces. .. wo, . eo Ss ;

f

By” He ds merried to Sophie, nee Lherisson,-
adopted son, i, : eo te

a Ye
but not 1

. Fayed ebsconded witi un unuetermined out large smount of money.
‘He hes little

with

> ‘
thet andre shoulu ve aude to divert some: of ‘the-"cotfee money" *

Charles wes ruferrdiiy, to certuin tuses on.coifee exports which £9
to the Bank. for deut amortization.) Andre roundly criticized =:
gherlos ond other velf-utyled finenedal una £iseul experts in the .

followsd thu udvicu of sucn persons ne: would wreck liciul, . Charlus.

tthew. He.

fom uM reavicnis tatu
ee B30 ey yor ee D.
™” Smt ast savas SECRET



--- Page 237 ---
14-0000

3 tanex Ove 0 : fs ee ve zt
‘ cuassire to 0 Bie a a POV a 5 gly CLASSIFIED MESSAGE Ca , “|
" 4 AMRF TO FILE BO. ~ . .
Sve aro act, To on aen ro onance OY
I -orsteoy C) sic. :
4 .
‘
UJ
t

SECRET 2215202 CITE “PORT au Pedy
DIRECTOR — 7
- REF: ~ DIRECTOR 83514 Lo . a
_ te NO TRACES WOFACT PLES over THAN ‘REF. 10 REF AND _ no
00-5-3,260, 765, 40 MAY 1963. Tee
 @y “SEE BIOGRAPHIC REGISTER.REPORT OF JULY ‘1968 FoR
_ SUMMARY EMBASSY TRACES. POUCHING ADDITIONAL DETAILS “wHIcH. ©
- WOWEVER DO NOT CHANGE PICTURE OF SHREWD UNSCRUPULOUS
|. MONEY MAD PROMOTER WITH UNORTHODOX IDEAS. ABOUT BUSINE SS
‘AND WIT# AIGH POLITICAL AMBIT IONS. - ;

Va 3570) 24

“1 Anes Ae et tmammte ie RECN enter cr Steer



--- Page 238 ---
14-0000

ew

worn Ohves Oxo S)
eLaaatvy to Fite wo. ——euassir veo Message *
WARP TO FILE WO.

eue mtoO) act. to srance C}
cocetney C) sto.

TOTAL foriés

PCE RMERNY OO mE NT . 7 so,

1
oF, ro

BE CRE T 2215222 CITE PORT. AU PRINCE 4332;
” DERECTOR - ee
REF DIRECTOR 65514
“fy WO TRACES worAct FES OT MER THAN-REF TO REF AND
a 260,765, 10 WAY 1963, .
| Be SEE BLOGRAPHIC REGISTER: REPORT oF Frka 1964 FOR”
_ SUNNARY EMBASSY TRACES. | POUCHING ADDIT ONAL DETAILS waren.
* MOVEVER DO NOT CHANGE PICTURE OF SHREWD UNSCRUPULOUS- ~~~
“MONEY. HAD, PROMOTER WITH UNORTHODOX DEAS S ABOUT ‘BUSINESS |
[0° AND wat, Aton Pour tcaL AMBITIONS. 7
“SR CRET
BT



--- Page 239 ---
14-00000

oni, iy J, GRENILLION:81d
wan CANI/7/Hla ta
on S658

om, 22 March 1967

ve: ‘Tenroarry PORT AU ‘PRINCE dag sha
, Port au PRINCE 4924 CN 22388) -

oe ‘wins ECRIVED WORD CLEMARD- ‘JOSEPH ‘CHARLES. DUE,

ARRIVE NEW YORK, 21. OR 22 MARCH. “CAN STATION CONFIRM SOONEET,
“Be wavs ‘TRACES ON. CHARLES,

pean ets



--- Page 240 ---
14-0000

Mrsinae pom - ROUTING AND/OR

. TOTAL COPIED
“M,J,GREMILLION :e1d .
. ¢ AWi/7/Hasth _ r: BECRET
: : +a = «895 .

, oe =< 22 March 1967 '

GANS suedatAnAT DUNsEMINATION

OF wom = F)omis mace one ne.

i iy ae

i) PoRt, AU PRINCE 4324: (IN 22308)

| BVMEND-1) RECEIVED WORD CLEMARD' JOSEPH

Q Aanive NEw “YORK. aa OR 22 ‘Manca, CaN STATION ‘CONFIRM SOONEST,



--- Page 241 ---
14-0000

2 Noes Ores Xue

Classi y fo FILE ap ET oC
+f Renee To rite no.
‘ore mol) ac,
oestaoy C} sic.

FIELD ems HOUSE. FROM HIM) ..
|. SOCIAL CONVERSATION, CHARLES, Asnep RACHFIELD 1F IT POSSIBLE 7
[-. To pass a “MSG. OUT, OF.CHANWELS DIRECTLY TO CHIEF LUPURE,
© RAVMFIELD ‘ASKED FOR '"SG- WITH. CONNENT, THAT. HE WOULD MAKE me
"ATTEMPT BUT COULD NOT SPEAK FOR CHIEF LUPURE. -CHARLES SAID |.”
/ SQ NOT READY. “RACHFIELD SAID THAT WHILE CHARLES. PREPARED we
| WS@ KE WOULD CHECK WITH CHIEF LNPURE... RACHFIELD: THEN REPORTED:
"IMMEDIATELY TO COS WHO STATED CHIEF. LAPURE SHOULD BE: NOT IFIED
SQONEST. CHIEF LWPURE-THEM:GAVE: HIN PERMISSION: ACCEPT: msc. a
PF Bie SANE” EVENING: ‘RACHFIELD. WENT CHARLES" HOME, 10. PICK
| UP “SG. CHARLES AGN STATED MSG NOT READY BUT. PROCEEDED
@ TELL RACHPIELD i VERY PRO-WOLADY AND WELL KNOWN. HIGH
~ LEVELS LNHARP.” CHARLES: SAID HE WOULD HAVE "SG READY: BY.

' “4@a@ HOURS FoLLow ING MORN ING ‘AND WOULD: BRING TO RACHFIELD'S
HOME SNe URETBR De  e : , _

| NEXT, moRw ING CHARLES ARRIVED ON Te canny ee ‘Recon SECR eT

wt jee nricconecnccrtnaicntc ts imam bE RE HLCRCALRE  OY 888 sa ae ecte ieee anated L



--- Page 242 ---
14-0000

a Pact 2 PORT AU PRINCE 4324 SECRET

i
|
i
“| | UNLESS HE ABLE INFORM CHIEF LNPURE CONTENTS OF PACKAGE.:
t
1
|
:

SACKET CONTAINING CONCEALED MANILA ENVELOPE SECRET SCOTCH
TAPE. RACHFIELD STATED THIS PACKAGE NOT IN KEEPING WITH.
"MEANING OF WORD MSG AND HAD NO AUTHORITY TRANSPORT. PACKAGE. .
TO CHIEF LNPURE. IN ATTEMPTS MAKE CHARLES REVEAL CONTENTS, -
RACHFIELD STATED i NOT PREPARED TALK AGAIN WITH CHIEF LRPURE

CHARLES STATED PACKAGE CONTAINED REPORT: OF COMMERSTAL EAM

|
|
|
i
]
{
|

! AND TOBACCO MONOPOLY. RACHFIELD SEY UP ANOTHER MEET ING . ;
“+ FOR ONE HOUR LATER WITH CHASLES. .RACHFIELD NET WITH cos ano oy .
“CHIEF LNPURE WHO TOLD HIN-TO ACCEPT PACKAGE. —

de WHILE. PICKING UP PACKAGE CHARLES.NADE alt our exten
"10 ONPRESS RACHFIELD ‘WITH HIS. PRO-WOLADY ‘TEWDENCIES. ME

‘ TOLD RACHFIELD HE FORCED GO. ALONG WITH DUVAL IER. 10 PROTEC

- MES TWO AND’ HALF MILLION DOLLAR INVESTMENTS. HAITI ASWELL.

AS PROTECT HIS-LIFE. ALSO, JUST. PRIOR RACHFIELD" 5 DEPARTURE °

CHARLES STATED HE. WILLING TELL ‘ANYTHING: CHIEF ‘LNPURE: wat

TO KNOJ. RACHFIELD. LEFT DOOR: wDE OPEN FoR FURTIER CORVER-

Martone Se.

‘Se , PACKAGE CONTAINED OVERT. MATER TAL rus v0 ms,



--- Page 243 ---
14-00000

a REITER SE DUBIN be CR EN SE oe Sot

~“ i SO
“PACE 3 PORT AU PRINCE 4324 SE C'RE ETSECR. et. -

i
TOBACCO MONOPOLY FUNDS, PAPERS ADDED NOTHING NEW, “wn.
POUCH COPIES, =~ | yO, }
6 AS Has AWARE, CHARLES: PRESENTLY W “POWER STRUGGLE : an | : .
WITH HENRI SICLAIT AND RUNOR-3S THAT. CHARLES LOSING, FROM = _
CONVERSATION RACHFIELD BELIEVES CHARLES RUNNING SCARED. -
IT ALSO RACHFIELD'S OPIN TON THAT. CHARLES WANTED (OPEN, CHANNEL
“TO LPURE, “AND BEING “UNSURE. TYPE-RECEPT 10H, USED. PAPERS-oF oe
SOME BUT LITTLE VALUE TO QPEN. CONTACT... HOWEVER, WHAT Most; 7
“INTERESTING IS NOT ‘VALUE. OF ORIGINAL PAPERS BUT Fact € DD
PASS ANYTHING AT ALL PLUS HIS OFFER ANSWER QUEST iatis,
“CHARLES “APPROACHED LWFORT: -PEFORE SINCE. HE: -
-OPPORT UN IST SEEKING: RE INSURANCE LO HARP” AND: LUPURE haVE TAKEN
"POSITION WILLING To. LISTEN AMY. TINE. CHARLES. wants. 10. TALK. |
"BUT NO STEPS WOULD. BE TAKEN IW HIS DIRECT 10N-ZN ‘HaITE, cos
a HAS” INSTRUCTED: RACHFIELD TO. FabL OW LNPURE ‘PATTERN s HOWEVER,
° STATION WILL BE: ALERT TO CHARLES: EXTERNAL TRAVEL PLans AND wm
| ADVISE’ HS AND’ AFFECTED STATIONS : AWEDIATELY,, ~

PSECRET , - SECRET

BT



--- Page 244 ---
14-0000 ,

wet . oy

Veen, ~ QUHTED STATES DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE |
- , ‘ Immigration and Naturalization Service :
Mieai, Florida Se ome

* {astructions: Any handwritten entries shall be In block capital tetters.. All: Spanish names shai: be hyphenated with the
Aather’s oame first and the mother's name following. . :

Olsector, Federal Bureau of investigation
_ Department of Justice ~ ee
Washington, D. C. 20535 :

The allen listed betow has been admitted to the United States onder the: roan af Section 161 (a) is wa e
Section 101.(a) 15 (G) of the vomigeation a and | National jonatity Act...

NY TAME: (Cepitat Letters) ©. a : , w Firat Nome

Widdie inves


--- Page 245 ---
14-0000

O-808¢047 ee

> TY CE LY |) Rian god ean oT
Dub gb _= obo Ty TS an ot a Y —

06 =

rT =a Tig : 03 JAN 6

Pre MCCTL YE! OS SAN te

—— rr Do GHENT TST TS“ CROSS REFER RE sen ES
Sc  (") THE Zor FILE CIYED UNDER LEFT MARGIN.


