
--- Page 1 ---
"4o4-10172-1 [2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992)
: oS . ‘

aa?

~

Cae CATON

SECRET

SORT GYRASE /Orerational
Q AMDENIN=~1" Progress Report - 13 Aupust 1962
ACTION REQUIRED BCALEUNCTS,

REF: UFGA-%425 dated 19 June 1962

‘1. SUMMARY: In the period since ref prorress report
AMDENTIN=1 has been primarily enraged in keeping his fences mended
with the various exile croups inthe area in anticipation of. mov-.
ing inta.a.pesition in the AMBUD-l-oreanfzation in which he will
-a_respensible for coordinating ‘the seledtion of paramilitary § ~
dates. From these groups. In additidn to this he has prepared
a nuater of reports providing backeround information,-and on cur-
_rent activities in the local PR®UMEN community and mounting .
Operation Antonico I, dn effort to establish contact with PBRUMEN
' fishermen thru his own fisherman contacts. Details follow: :

OPERATIONAL DEVELOPMENTS

2. In response to a Station request subject provided an
estimate of the current situation in PBRUMEN. This report
stressed the points that the farmers and the fishermen. in PBRUMEN
are the most willing and capable of providing support to resis-
tance activities as a result of their having suffered the most at
the hands of the current administration after being largely —
responsible for its obtaining power, He also provided a general
strategic plan of Oriente Province in which he defined the main
-areas in which guerrilla elements can survive and how they can be
reached fron coastal resupply points. His ability to do ‘this is
based upon his being a native of the area and one who has been
primarily interested in its geography due to his former large.

“agriculture holdings there. a oe.

3._ He has had one meeting with AMBUD-1 for the purpose of
maintaining contact. His main question to AMBUD-1 “was with regard
_ to the latter's ability to actually control the people on his staff.
He was disappointed by the reply which though positive could not be’
supported with an example of where AMBUD-1 had actually brought :

Distribution: - GoBinteaa BT TTT TTT
3. = Addressee

HEADQUARTERS PLE ARBOR
Der POEs 3
y202-251853



--- Page 2 ---
14-0000

Chaar arton,

SECRET

PACs BT MRR AND EOL

UFGA-$212

about the proved to be ineffective,
AMDCNIM-1 is a pood friend of AMBUNeL as a result of his father's
long standing relationship with hin, but at this point has very

, little respect fer him as a result of, as he says, AMBUD-1's
oreanization into an effective body
and to enpare in activities which actually detract fron the success
of the current PSRUMEN reoine. It remains that he is willine

tain ONSek py Ovnanizetion anc icempt ty create Unity_amone_the
military sections of the nenber groups at such time as KUBARK gives.
hin’ the go ahead, - i nnammnentiinmmatndimatedl

PBRUMEN. The foundation for this activity is quite. tenuous as a
‘result of a variety of factors which make it difficult. to arrance
Sea rendezvouses in the absence of radio contact. - Several i

have been made to the Anguila Key area for this purpose, the last :
OF which’was su ported..by_KUBARK and was called Operation Antonico
is This attempt was unsuccessful due to the failure of. the inside

contact to appear, It developed that the woman and child who vere

to be exfiltrated on this operation appeared in the JMWAVE area
two days later, having obtained permission to le
They carried the

FUNDS EXPENDED:

6.,

OF ee
a. $200. was piven to fteriberto SARDINAS Campo] as
maintenance until_his,élearance comes throughy -It . |
is intended that {Sar HAS] will be an investigator of | |

operational leads~and an“&ssistant to AMDENIMN~1 in _
the handling of his fishermen and operational candidates. |

b. $300. was given to AMDENIMo1 for Passage to the

widow of AMGLAD-1, He is the channel for this payment
until such time as HOs arrives at a settlement figure
and this obligation can be disposed of.

Foam
aS 53a USE PREMOUS common

fee) CONTINUED.



--- Page 3 ---
14-0000

~ar_overatl)
~time desired, .
will. provide ca

- and can be. accepted by the Station.

CONTINUATION OF
DISPATCH

graph 4,

7. INTELLIGENCE PRODUCTION:
of memoranda on develonnents within the various ex
JMWAVE area, none of whic
all of which Contribute

local politics,

the
“political beliefs

CLAS SIICATION

SECRET

ce. $328. was given to AMDENIM
Antonico I, which operation i

and backrround of most of
leaders and the activities of the Bequer pro

ANDENIM-1 has

UD.

~l in support of Operation
s described under para-

understanding of.

helpful in clarifving the picture as to the ;novements within the

UR at this time while the Station is trying to de

to orpanize this group in order to be able to take over its more

‘worthwhile features without becomin
it special -prominence in the exile
on to help bring the UR into the AMBUD-1 orpani

community.

@ unduly committed to giving
He is being counted.

zation as a means

of creating the appearance of greater unity among the exile

community.

8. COMMENTS AND FLANS:
resulting from AMDENIM-l¢
becoming more and more su
‘proresstona
gave his fishermen for not r
refugees they met at Anguila Ke
contact, They had failed to ade
had succeeded in surviving in PB
own, on the basis that they were too youn
As it turned out the two r t r"
salesmen and had been able to travel from Havana to. $4:
Cuba without being stopped once.
was reminded of a good cover he ha

s efforts,

s efforts at this point he is
sceptible to KUBARK control an
~& yecent example i8the critique he
ealizing more information out of the

y while waiting for their inside

quately debrief two young men, who
RUMEN for over two.months on their
g to be knowledgeable.
efugees had used the cove

On learning of this
s heard about, namely fighting

While no spectacular achievements are

Steadily
more

tidago de
AMDENIM-1

cock fanciers, which activity seems to be on the incredse asa

result of the greater amount of spare time available

The sport is actually becoming a year around proposi

than being restricted to the winter months as in the

' C) have. AMDENIM=}. | continue his

basis that_he is free to move as the

Sn overall sensteneiae efFect_on the AMBUD-T

He WiIT continué his efforts

ndidates for infiltration as they become “available”
“Operation Antonico -ITI- s

lia (boat) to'éstablish:”

scheduled for 27 August using a Magno
contact with fishermen living on a ke

There is a possibility that he will j
contact with an old associate who i:

PBRUMEN pgovernmént asa means of elic
regime policy and plans. Co

USE PREVIOUS EDITION. ~

y in the Caibarie
ourney to Jamaica
OW..a° prominent. mi he
ting information: on'current ~ °

resent pursu
tation desires

Sires -an'
-T Srganization a

“with: the Fishermen and

“OF DISPATCH

“23

provided a number
ile groups in the
qualify as intellicen: information but
the Station's bétter_und

Specifically, he haS provided info on the
the PBRUMEN exiled labor
He has also been

termine how best

the people,

oo
Of the


