
--- Page 1 ---
A ANRAAN. =
\i104-10400-10316 42025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |
‘

. . . . .

en (SECURITY.
. ; ; . ror Co MMT T

11 March 1977

’ ye?
. . . oa

MEMORANDUM FOR: Mr. James M. Potts wn At
. Chief, Africa Division fue

Mr. Richard S, Sampson a ke 3
Chief, Europe Division

Mr.. Alan D. Wolfe
Chief, Near East Division

Mr. Richard F. Stolz

2 ; - Chief, Soviet/East European Division
FROM ; : John D. Walker
0/SA/DO/O
SUBJECT . : Guidelines for Providing Information

to the House Appropriations Committee
Surveys and Investigations Staff
Concerning Foreign Intelligence and
Security Services

1. Since members of the S&I Staff will be
talking with your Divisions in the near. future,
it may be worthwhile to review the guidelines as
to what may be said concerning relationships with

foreign liaison services. In the broad sense,
liaison services constitute both a source and a
method.

2. We are prepared to discuss the following:

a. The identification and responsibili-
ties of the liaison services.in a particular
area to the extent that we can draw on
sources other than information derived through
the established liaison relationship, i.e.
overt information or information from penetra-
tions which will not endanger the source.

b. In further describing the liaison
services, we can provide information on the.
objectives, key personnel, strength, budget

E2 IMPDET
CL BY 012860

SECRET



--- Page 2 ---
13-00000 !

and methods of operations of services, provided
that, such data will be drawn from open sources
or penetrations and not from details of liaison ~
‘arrangements with the services themselves.

c. Agency manhours and funds devoted to
liaison with the foreign services.

d. In the case of SIGINT liaison, further
details on such arrangements, including the
scope of funds and equipment provided to such
foreign services. .

d. We are prepared to provide general
comments on the degree of operational coopera-
‘tion with the Station. If technical support,
for example, provides a useful input, we can
state that the liaison service provides
technical support, using a qualifying adjective
to define, such as excellent, limited, etc.

3. We have no objection to the provision of
foreign intelligence reports based ‘on liaison with

‘such services. Source descriptions should be those

used in the disseminated report.

4. We will not make available details on
liaison arrangements, information on sources and
methods of such services which have been obtained ©

’ through liaison or jointly controlled sources or-

other information which would reveal Agency sources
and methods or violate the trust on which the
official liaison relationship is based.

5. The S&I Staff approves close liaison
relationships and believes that these relationships
are cost effective.

John D. Walker

0/SA/DO/0: JDWalker: kaw (1542)

Distribution :
Original - C/AF
' 1 - C/EUR
1 - C/NE
1 - C/SE
2 - SA/DO/O

~ SECRET


--- Page 3 ---
13-00000 ' . '

SO , Guidelines for Providing Information
to Congressional Oversight Committecs on
Forcign Intelligence and Security Services

These guidelines take into account the fact that
foreign intelligence and security. services, when acting
in connection with the Agency's official liaison with
them, constitute both a source and a method and thus
require the statutory protection accorded any other
intelligence source or method. The guidelines also
recognize that the duly constituted oversight bodies of
the Congress have expressed an interest in such services |
and in the general scope, nature and extent of the Agency's
relationships with them. The purpose of these guidelines
is to provide a formula for dealing with these two

- sometimes conflicting objectives.

The Agency is prepared to provide, upon specific
request, appropriately classified and sanitized information
to oversight committees on the following aspects of
foreign intelligence and security services:

a. ‘The identification of the governments with
whose services CIA has liaison arrangements ;

b. Agency man hours and funds devoted to
liaison with foreign services;:

c. In the case of SIGINT liaison, further

details on such arrangements, including the scope of



--- Page 4 ---
13-00000 ! “

ae ~

funds and equipment provided to such forcign services;

d. Information on the objectives, key personnel,
strength, budget and methods of operation of such services,
provided that such data will be drawn from open sources or
penetrations and not from the details of liaison
arrangements with the services themselves;

e. Where relevant, foreign intelligence reports
based on liaison with such services.

- , The Agency will not make. available to the oversight
committees the details of liaison arrangements with
foreign. services, information on sources and methods of ..
such services obtained through liaison or jointly
controlled sources, or other information which would

reveal Agency sources or methods or violate the trust on
which. these official liaison relationships is necessarily
based.

In the event of substantial allegations of improper
activities conducted by foreign intelligence or security
services with which the Agency is presumed to maintain
liaison, every effort will be made to provide all relevant
facts which bear on such allegations. Where this would

i involve departure from the above guidelines, the Director

will be prepared to meet with the Chairman or Vice-Chairman

1 of the committee to seek a satisfactory resolution of such

problems. ..



--- Page 5 ---
13-00000 . 1,

D | HSC edt Fol |

[REVIEW STAFF _|
aan aw
24 July ia _ ut} >

f
—

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

Mr.. Colby, Mitch Rogovin and Mr. Knoche met with
Chairman Otis Pike at 9/30, 7/24 in Chairman Pike's office
to discuss groundrules, etc. for the House Select Committee
on Intelligence. .

Mr. Colby left the following material with Pike:

1. 16 June 1975 Letter to the Honorable Elmer B. Staats”
Comptroller General of the United States, Signed by
Mr. Colby. The letter deals with the GAO's audit
of the Central Intelligence Agency. (Attached)

2. Guide to Central Intelligence Agency Statutes and Law
dated September 1970 (without the Ryan Amendment
on Foreign Intelligence). _Piled in 6p 9120)

3, Three Groudrules papers: (Attached)
--Agreements To Be SoughtBy the DCI With chatzenes \,
of the Select Committees

x . --Secrecy Agreement

on  =-Guides for Protection of Classified Information
_ “And Documents Furnished ‘The Select Committee...

4, 7 ‘March 1975 1 Letter : from Colby to Senator Church,
(Attached)

Rosemarie R. Hesterberg

a


--- Page 6 ---
1l

SECRET

Checklist for DCI Discussion with HSC

; 4
- Your intent to be cooperative and forthcoming.

Your responsibility to protect S&M will need HSC understanding
of particularly sensitive matters: -

--names of agents. and sources.. —

--names of cooperating American organizations and
contacts to whom we have pledged confidentiality. _

--material from foreign liaison,

; +7sensitive intelligence. methods and techniques of collection,

wil need to work out seeurity groundrules,

=-Chairman of USIB Security. Committee and CIA Director

of Security available to help work out custodial: arrangements,
compartmented clearances, etc,
: Se a
Importance of secrecy agreements. Your willingness to ‘suspend
them to permit testimony by current and ex-employees.

. Will confirm with a letter and an employee bulletin which

can be used by HSC in dealing with Agency witnesses and
interviews. 73

nae: a

24 July 1975

Classified by
Exempt from general
doclassitication schadule of F.0. 11652

exemption scheduta 5B (1), (2), (9)
Automaticaty declassiticd on
Date Impossible to Determine

SECRET


--- Page 7 ---
_ AGREEMENTS TO'BE SOUGHT BY THE DCI WITH
. /  €HAIRMEN OF THE SELECT COMMITTEES

de ‘It would be desirable if the per could secure e agréement |
. with the Chairmen of the Select Committees, as has been customary:
in. other’ Congressional proceedings regarding sensitive © matters, fhat:

_— ’ (a). ‘Departments’ and agencies shall have the’ ri ight
to ‘request that testimony be givepionly im executive session,

‘that in some instances testimony be’ “off-the-record" and | Oo
that certain testimony be heard only by members and in as
‘some cases, sonly by the Chairman and Vice Chairman.

cathe ) Witnesses be. afforded. an wn opportunity to review

and. ‘comment on and/or correct the record of their testimony.

_ Prior to any panesssen of it.

ete

: aon When que  stioned about intelligence matters that
“come under the purview of another organization, witnesses.

. ; “Should be permitted tg state that a response to the question |

-s S.+..- . {s not properly within their authority and to respectfully .

" suggest that the appropriate party be called to testify on
wach matters. a -

2s tt would ‘also be desirable if the DCI could secure agreement
“with the ‘Chairmen of the Select Committees that those agencies
-\ furnishing documerits to the committees be authorized to excise from
_ those documents, prior to presentation, the names of their personnel
“under cover or whose personal safety might be jeopardized as wellas —

—

_ : :--- those of other individuals whose Safety or individual privacy, may be - ot

~ jeopardized by disclosuxé. Also’ excised should be names of sources,
operations, specific details of technical devices and systems main-

| tained in compartrmented channels and names of organizations:

- cooperating on a highly c confidential basis.

' 3,. In view of their susceptibility to foreign countermeasures,
it would be desirable if the DCI could obtain agreement.with the
Chairmen of the Select Committees not to require presentation of details



--- Page 8 ---
of the technology of the technical collection programs. . It would also
be desirable if the Select Committees adopted the use of Compart-
- mented Control: Systems to protect documents on these programs
‘and cleared only those staff personnel with an absolute need-to-know.
The responsible departments and agencies would be glad to advise:
and assist in‘any arrangements the Chairmen would desire i in this
compartmented area. . Lo mes - foo
he Further! it would be destrabte if the- per attempt to

: secure an agreement with the Chairmen, of the Select. Committees ba
*. that they will entertain and consider security Principles and t guide~

7 lines which will be provided. _ . ee a

19 ¢ meeree-ePoewsome



--- Page 9 ---
13-00000 » " ; to

| SECRECY AGREEMENT 9-1

L,. ree =: accepting employment
. or assignment with the Select Gommnitiee to Study Governmental
Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities, recognize the

- Special trust and confidence placed in me to protect classified infor- .

. mation from unauthorized disclosure. ;

. t I hereby agree to accept the specific obligations set forth:
below.as 2 condition precedent of my employment or assignment with.
. the Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with Respect _
to Intelligence Activities, established by the Senate of the United
”. States, Resolution 21, agreed to on January 27, 1975, hereinafter
_ referred to as the Select Committee. :

Iti is my understanding that i in the course of my employment
. or ‘assignment with the Select Committee I will be given access to
information from departments and agencies of the Government which
is classified in accordance with the starnidards set forth in Executive
A Order. 11652 of March-8, 1972, as amended. All classified information
so acquired by me in the course of my employment remains the
property of the United States of America and I further agree to
surrender upon demand by the Chairman of the Select Committee
‘or his designee(s) or upon my separation from the Select Committee,
any classified material whichthas come into my possession asa -
. -result of my employment or assignment with the Select Committee.

I hereby agree that the burden is on me to determine if |
inforrnation is classified and that I will never divulge, publish or
reveal by word, writing, conduct or otherwise any classified

: information which has come to my knowledge as a result of my
‘employment or assignment with the Select Committee without prior
written consent of the Chairman or the President of the Senate or"
their duly authorized xepresentative, .



--- Page 10 ---
. Ihereby agree that any information learned during my
employment or assignment with the Select Committee which is related
to intelligence and prepared for publication by me will be submitted to_
the Chairman or the President of the Senate or their duly authorized
representative prior to discussing with or showing to any publisher,

_ editor or literary agent for the purpose of determining whether said

. material contains any classified information as defined in Executive
Order 11652. Iagree that the Chairmas of the Select Committee,

- President of the Senate or their duly authorized representative has

~ the authority to make the final determination as to whether information
As classified and thus should be deleted from the material submitted.
aa “Yhave been informed of the provisions of 18 U.S.C. 793, 794, .

' 798 and 952; and 50 U;S.C, 783 (b}; and 42 U.S.C. 2274; and Executive ~
. Order.11652, all of which relate to the protection of classified infor-—

: mation, and understand their meaning. . Lo tg te

Further, I agree to: abide by s such rules ‘and procedures as the
‘Select Committee shall instjjute for the protection of classified material.
_~ Lunderstand that eny breach of any part of the obligations in this agree-
‘ ment could subject r me to legal. and/ or. administrative action. .

. cae s further agree ‘that all the conditions and obligations imposed
on me with respect to the protection of. “classified information by this
agreement and applicable security regulations apply during my employ-
ment or assignment and continue after that relationship has terminated.

: I take the obligations set forth above freely and without any
. ‘mental reservations or purpose of evasion. _ tog ee Tt

Signature

Date.

Semen mere Dam een ee



--- Page 11 ---
, . or sn. . : ry

'. ‘GUIDES FOR PROTECTION OF CLASSIFIED INFORMATION
‘AND DOCUMENTS FURNISHED THE SELECT COMMITTEES

.. ¥, Personnel Security Clearances
@) Background Investigation

. It would be desirable for the Select Committees to ‘stipulate
"that no staff personnel is to be given access to any classified material,
.. testimony or.information received or generated by the committees. ~~
without prior receipt of a security clearance based ona full field
7 investigation. ; . :

. tb) Secrecy Agreement
: It would be desirable for the Select, Committees to: require 2 a
signed secrecy agreement of employees or individuals assigned to
; the committees! staffs. The agreement should. include Provisions:
ae 1) That acceptance of committee secrecy regulations .
toe is a.condition precedent of employment or assignment;

2) Recognizing US Government property rights to
clas sified information; . : ste

? . . 7 .
3) Requiring prior written consent before aivalgence

of classified information; oe et ee Ed

Lo: 4) For recognition that breach of the secrecy rules
- -"  . and obligations contained in the agreement could subject —
' the signer to administrative and/or legal action under

appropriate statutes; as whe

5) That there is no time limit on the terms of the
agreement. .



--- Page 12 ---
13-00000 : . "

2. Physical and Document Security 2 Tn a 7 Do

a , The Select Committees should adopt rules to insure S that the
', seerecy of any sensitive information received or generated by it be
_ preserved, These rules should be made known to the individuals. -
~ and agencies who will be called upon to present testimony or. ne

- materials. Among. these should be ules, fe-phyaisel security ‘and ce
document security... os

-@) ‘Physical Security _

“Tt would be desirable if the Select Committees adopt the following
rules related to physical security: . : :

. ay AlL classified material will be stored i in » safes for so
safekeeping i in the registry of the Joint Committee on Atomic .
Energy or similar facility and handled in accordance with 7

the regulations of thissregistry for classified material.. -

2). Twenty - four-hour guard protection, ‘supplemented
. .by anti-intrusion. alarms, should be required on the storage
oe area. ; oy . wae .

AR
*.3) Areas selected for use in closed session should
be guarded against entry by unauthorized persons. _— : .

a . “AY “The committees should z arrange for the conduct of
q _ J” audio countermeasures to preclude the possibility of .
Se unauthorized use-of trazsrnitters and/or recording devices. .
It should be noted that a foreign clandestine transmitter was
located in the Rayburn House Office Building on. 12 February
1973, . ; step
Te 5) At the end of each session of the Select Cornmittees,
__ the hearing room should be examined by a cleared staff.
. officer who will secure any misplaced classified material
or waste.. ; ;

mer ar empaere


--- Page 13 ---
13-00000: '

6) Areas should b be designated in which classified

material can be reviewed. These arcas should be secure

against access by unauthorized personnel, Material should

not be removed -from these areas for the sake of convenience _

_ except when necessary for the work of the committees.and

_ should: not-be,transported ‘ovérnight to the office « ‘or residence.
of personnel of the committees. ; .

, 7 (b): Document. Security ; ,

’ . . - 27 . a
. .1) Committees should select and identify a single
location and specific personnel authorized to sign acknow~
ledgement of receipt of classified materials provided to
: the committees. : ;

; 2) A system of document control should be established
_ to permit control of ¢lassified documents to provide for
: accountability. : ss :

. 3) Duplic ation cf documents should be controlled so
as to require a record of the dogument reproduced, the

". number of copies reproduced and the custodian or receiving ©
personnel. Reproduced classified documents should be —

. subject to the: same controls: as the original. ; .
4). Appropriate arrangements should be. made for

* the de struction of classified waste. i

mas o oan a von

a) Transcripts. The committee's Should give ©
consideration to the necessity of providing appropriate _ oe te
. security in the transcription of testimony by committee et

transcribers. The committees may desire to charge each
agency presenting testimony with this responsibility.

some, if not all cases, this might include escort of

materials to the place of transcription, the securing of
* earbons, waste and notes and the return of the transcribed
testimony to the committee for safekeeping in accordance _
. with comimittce rules. :



--- Page 14 ---
13-00000: , " ‘

* 6} Early agreement should be reached on the
‘disposition of classified materials such as storage
a _ under seal in the National'Archives. The question of
foe access should be determined by. the President of the
“Senate or. the Speaker of the House. .

; 3. _ Sompartmented Information a ia ,

a

There i is. some’ ‘extr emely. sensitive information i in: athe intelligence
‘community which is ‘dis seminated only to those who ‘have a very strict
. "need to know" in order to build, perfect, operate.or handle the ~
Ls ‘material produced by extremely sensitive’ foreign: intelligence collection
_..7 "programs.. The sensitivity of these programs rests upon the vulner-
ne ability to countermeasures which a foreign government could easily
’ jastitute, if.details. of the means of collection, became known. Thus,
even individuals cleared for Top Secret information do not have access .
_ | to compartmented information unless they are required to have such
'.. knowledge in. the performance of their duties. This information is
handled in Compartmented Control Systems. It would be desirable
-if the Chairmen would adopt the Compartmented Control Systems on”
these extremely’ sensitive collection efforts and clear only those
_ Staff personnel with an absolute "need to know" about such systems,
‘and that documents related to such systems: be handled in a compart-—
mented fashion by the Select Committee. The responsible departments
. and agencies would be glad to advise and assist in any. arrangements.
the Chairmen would desire in this  compartmented | area. oo :

a 4.. Securit Officer

. “Te would be desirable if the committees: appointed a a security
officer with the responsibility of discharging the security rules adopted
by the committee and of serving as a point of contact with the depart-
ments and agencies of interest to the committee. It would also be
desirable if the committee rules required each agency of interest to
identify a single point of contact to facilitate Provisions of security
support required by the committee. . Se tt



--- Page 15 ---
13-00000,

ENTHAL INTELLIGENCE AGED"

. SHINGTON, D.c. 20505

Honorable Elmer B. ‘Staats’ Dos

Comptroller General of the United States oe oe, Cote ” .

_ General Accounting Office : ; . ; mo -

| 441 G Street L- ae Lo ae we
Washington, Dd. ce “ © 20548 _ : : a

Dear Mr. Siaats: oe:
“8 My attention has been directea toa dette! oom Mr. Keller, General
Accounting Office, to the Honorable William Proxmire dated May 10, 1974,
_. Which was > placed i in the Congressional Record. by Senator Proxmire on |.’
o February 11, 1975.> The letter deals with the intelligence community and
” reviews the General Accounting Office's" right to audit and obtain information
J. from the Central Intelligence Agency en :

"Inasmuch as Mr. Keller has treated a a subject basic to this Agency! s

; capability to carry out work mandated by Congress, I believe it would serve’
.| 2 usefal purpose to review some of the background concerning the use of
confidential fonds. and their relationship to the audit of CIA over the years.

vee -Mr. Keller notes in his letterthat there are "a fairly substantial number
‘. of instances where expenditures are accounted for solely upon a cerfification .
. ', by the head of the department or establishment involved." The need is clear
: in the case of this Agency. The necessity to safeguard certain truly vital
foreign intelligence secrets has been recognized by the Congress in its
_ direction to the Director of Central Intelligencetd protect intelligence sources
_ and methods frora unauthorized disclosure.’ This responsibility was complemented
'. by authorizing certain expenditures "for objects of a confidential, extraordinary,
or emergency nature," to be accounted for solely on the certificate of the Director
of Central Intelligence. Such expenditures -would apply, for example, to a
secret agent operating abroad in-a hostile climate whose identity must be pro--
tected not.only so that he can continue supplying the intelligence involved, but»
zlso because his freedomrrand.on, ocpdgion his Jife--weighs i in the balance. ' i :

ce “Other intelligence acti: ities do not have such obvions sécurity require- “
ments, but are, nonetheless, within the sources and methods concept. Liaison .
with foreign intelligence and security agencies is extremely important in fields of . ~
both positive intelligence and counterintelligence. Such liaisons to be effective
. depend on the confidence of each service that the other will protect not only the
mere fact of the relationships, but also its‘sources and methods and sensitive
information, Compromise of any of these brings not only protests from the foreign
liaison service, but in some cases a lessening or even cessation vi its cooperation.

THe “en mt aC Usi tee —_ — }. ,

ERE af . . ‘ [ ‘ . #/

(. -


--- Page 16 ---
13-00000',

‘Even overt activities Have their own ‘security problems.” Thus, many U. Ss. .
; citizens and others are willing to provide sensitive information to overt intelligence
7 units s only on condition that their cooperation in this ‘respect, be absolutely protected.

eed gotta yea toy bef te
my This need for the Special protection of intelligence sources and methods has
. been well recognized by officials in the executive, judicial, and legislative |
‘branches of our Government. Mr. Lindsay C. Warren, then Comptroller General :
’ of the United States, in a letter dated March 12, 1948, to the Director, Bureau of
the Budget,° addressed the provision granting the Director of Central Intelligence
the power to certify the expenditure of confidential funds by: stating that while it
provided "for the granting of much. wider authority than I would ordinarily
recommend for Government agencies, generally;. the purposes sought to be
vo obtained i in the establishment of the Central: Inteljigence Agency are believed to.
. bé of such paramount importance as to justify the extraordinary measures pro-
_. posed therein." He went on to-say that the "necessity for secrecy in such matters

unauthorized disclosure.” “Under these seeds, he stated ;
. called PPOR. to object t to the Proposals advanced. oo Fe

. It ‘has been and ita remains ‘the policy of CIA to o rely upon vouchered funds
. (wherever possible. (Vouchered furids are those which can be accounted for and -
‘: audited in conformance with the laws that apply to other Government agencies.
-+ and with standard Government regylations and procedures.) Currently more | —
~. than half of the Agency's appropriafions are disbursed as vouchered funds.
me The confidential funds certification authority referred to by Mr. Warren in his.
.. March 12, 1948 letter is reserved for "objects of of a confidential, 2 oeaare nary:
or emergency nature." . os :

wo From the beginning of CIA. records for aif\vouchered fund expenditures
. | were made available to and were subject to a voucher audit by the GAO. Use of
~’ the voucher audit procedure allowed the GAO to examine expenditure and

. . + eollection vouchers and related documents to determine whether experditures —

“\ were made'legally and solely for the objects for which appropriations were made.
Use of the voucher audit procedure also allowed CIA to protect those activities of
a confidential, extraordinary or F emergency nature, i.e., intelligence sources
and methods. . Fe .

\ctment-of the. CIA Logislation, GAO adopted a: _
"comprehensive audit approach," and raised with the CIA Subcommittee of the” *-"
. House Armed Services Committee the desirability of an expanded audit of Agen
” activities. The Comptroller General stated by letter dated May 29, 1959 to
. Subcommittee Chairman Kilday that he did "not recommend any change in section 10
(now section 8) of the Central Intelligence Act" and that "any broadening of our
audit activities should not include an evaluation of the intelligence activities of

the Agency." "



--- Page 17 ---
13-00000:

. + Mr.‘Allen Dulles, th.-:) Director of Central Intelligenc \agreed tha that GAO
should expand its current audit activities: in a letter to the Comptroller dated _
October 16, 1959, cautioning, however, that the comprehensive audit would have--
to be limited so as to remain outside the area of sensitive security operations for
which: by law the Director’ s certificate must be deemed a sufficient voucher .

: + ®The results of the trial. period of comprehensive audit from 1959 | to 1961. .
‘| were madeJmown to the CIA Subcommittee in a letter of May 16, 1961 from the -
. Comptroller General in which he said the.GAO planned to discontinue the audit

of CIA activities. He acknowledged that various steps were taken by the CIA "to
place the General Accounting Office in a position. to make a comprehensive audit —

. of the overt activities of CIA." Nevertheless, he stated that GAO "cannot effectively

.. review and evaluate activities of the Support Component because the confidential :
and overt activities of this component.are integrpted to such an extent that we
cannot make reasonably comprehensive audits." He further stated "we have been
‘+ given sufficient access to make reasonably comprehensive reviews of the overt _--
activities of the Intelligence Component, but such reviews, in our opinion; will 3 ni
be productive‘of significant evaluations because we cannot feasibly evaluate the we
+ extent to which needed overt information is available for collection or deter

* the need for the intelligence inforniation selected for collation and use in the pis
- duction of intelligence reports.". In short, the Comptroller General was recognizing
the conflict between the philosophy underlying a "comprehensive audit approach”.
‘and the Director's statutory responsibility and authority to Protect intelligence -
‘Sources and methods. . en whee: re

a co .Or Both the Director and Chaifman Vinson, of the House Committee ¢ on a Armed.
Soeoe aon Services, ‘requested that the Compffoller General continue to audit Agency affairs

on a limited basis, but after another trial period the Comptroller General reiterated ~

‘ his earlier view. In a letter to Chairman Vinson dated June 21, 1962, tHe Comptrollea:

_ General stated his belief that for maximum effectiveness "it would be necessary |

" for our GAO audit staff to have nearly completé access to CIA activities;"and =~

' that even to-_perform reasonably comprehensive reviews would require "complete .

access to the administrative activities ... that-are Performed 4 in Support of both

sensitive and nonsensitive operations of CIA. " ; . a

a Chairman Vinson replied to the Comptroller General o on n ily. 18, 1962,
stating that, "the restrictions you met within the Central Intelligence Agency -
“-* are necessary, I believe, for the proper protection of its intelligence activities
~:and shuld be maintained.” “The Chairman agreed, however, that in view of:
=---" the Gomptroller General's opinion that a continued audit was ‘not a worthwhile ~

_. effort, GAO might withdraw from further audit activities f in the Central 1 Intelligence

Agency... oo a on we,

os I summary, I believe that several. sipotnte are 2 deserving of emphasis i in
assessing the nature and history of GAO's audit activities with respect to > this

Agency: _ ey



--- Page 18 ---
13-00000 ood

“ (a) CIA coopen; td fully in all respects in exten. de
administrative support and in granting security clearances - i.
a and ¢ access to information related to vouchered fund activities... oo

. - (b) The Chairman of the interested oversight. committee |
. ip the House of Representatives was fully informed of the nature | ;
ahd status of the activity. ; oe Lo, ae ot ok

() ‘This Agency. encouraged ¢ GAO to ‘conduct and to.
continue to conduct: its activities consistent with the operational
"and statutory requirements imposed upon f this Agency.
. i323 a te -
» (a) The decision. to discontinue the audit activities. ; Te
was made solely by GAO and was’ approvedby th the Chairman. i
_of the House Armed Services Committee. .

“’)W. BE. Colby
“.. > Director

Distribution: we fool _
Orig Addressee Be oe

oe ~occ to
“Me DDA ere
Sle “Compt Co a rer
1- OF . ” . oa .f : ye . a . Lo To .
1-08s. - : oe “

ee oe OLC Subject (GAO).,.
” 1.1 ~ OLC Proxmire file’ :

ee a “OLC Chrono - at
_ OL: WPY: cg a3 Jun 75) -

wioadie:

=
a <a
=

at si i a


--- Page 19 ---
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENC
_. WASHINGTON, D. ¢. 20505 .

. The Honorable Otis G. Pike, Chairman
Select. Committee on Intelligence —
House of Representatives” .
- Washington, De. c. 20515,

as
“we :
ars

Dear Mr. Chairman:

we In our: conversation on. Friday ‘you asked ‘for. the statutory |
basis for the compartmentation principle. I wish first to torn
respond to your inquiry and then suggest a manner: in which your...
staff can receive access to the sensitive material protected

by special cor artmentation_ s stems. oo, eed oo

7) The current ‘basis: for the U.S. Government security
“+. Classification system is Executive Order 11652, “promulgated °
-..+,0n 8 March 1972. Historically, foreign intelligence. has
:. been treated as. one category of classified national security
. information. There are numerous.statutory recognitions. of - 7
. the importance of national security information, e.g., the --
-- Freedom of Information Act... Consequently, much foreign. Soe
. dntelligence is classified ‘CONPIDENTIAL, SECRFT or TOP.
- «SECRET according to. specifications set forth in-the Order. . ~
'. Not‘all foreign intelligence, however, is classified national
‘security information under the provisions of the Executive
_ Order (e.g., an American.source providing foreign information
.o@r assistance). Also, the potential risks attendant with
'.the compromise of a foreign intelligence.source or method
‘differ substantially from-the risks attendant with much .
Classified . defense information. _ :

Section 102(d)(3) of the National Security Act of 1947,
as ‘amended. provides: "That the Director of Central Intel-’
“ligence shall be responsible for protecting intelligence
sources and methods from unauthorized disclosure:" In -
recognition of this responsibility, National Security.
Council Intelligence Directive No. 1 (17 February 1972)
instructs the Director of Central Intelligence to, :

",..develop and review security standards and practices-as

they relate to the protection of intelligence and of . : ;
intelligence sources and methods from unauthorized disclosure.”

,


--- Page 20 ---
_ and applicable: to. the overall. U.S - ingelligence community:

Since the. National Security Act ‘aia not provide for an authority
- . corresponding with the DCI's responsibility in this area,

the Directive provides that the Members of the U.S. Intelligence :
Board are responsible for: "The supervision of the dissemination -
_and security of intelligence material."’ The Director of Central
Intelligence, acting with the advice of the U.S. Intelligence
Board, has ‘promulgated a-number of directives, regulations
‘and ‘security’ Manuals.,.:‘related to the protection of foreign
intelligence and foreign: intelligence sources and methods,

The fundamental, security principle: ‘involved. in the: pro- .
“tection of foreign intelligence. and. of its sources .and. methods
“is a strict application of "need to know" --a principle
<veferred to in ’Exectitive Order 11652, Section 6(A).. This -
applies the simple mathematical premise that the fewer the
“number of individuals. made- privy to a secret, the less likely’

that it will be disclosed... The security principle of
'compartmentation" involving. special access and information
dissemination controls.is designed to ensure that only those
individuals whose "need to know” has been specifically ae
approved by some higher. authority, who have been specially
indoctrinated, and who.undertake special commitments to
protect. it are provided acéess to a particularly sensitive
category of foreign intelligence sources and methods. . .
Compartmentation assists in “the: application of the "need- -to-.
know" principle by ensuring that individuals are. provided
_access to only that information clearly essential to the
_ Performance: of their duties. . . .

- Compartmentation: was” undoubtedly a major contributing
factor involved in the nation's secret development. of the

-. atomic. bomb during World War II, and the principle is still

implicit in security procedures related to. ERDA’s “RESTRICTED ~

DATA" as reflected in the Atomic Energy Act of 1954. In the

- field of U.S. foreign intelligence activities, compartmentation-

'.was practiced throughout the development and operation of the

“ U-2Z reconnaissance program. One of the major foreign .

.. intelligence categories of activities using formalized con- .

. partmentation procedures today involves the matter of :
' foreign signals intercept for intelligence purposes, i.e., ot

: |¢ommunications intelligence. Title 18 of the U.S. Code

-. Section 798 recognizes the special character of this —

material by providing specifically for prosecution for the

unauthorized disclosure. of information concerning any

communications activities of the United ‘States without the



--- Page 21 ---
necessity to show intent to harn the United States. The .
reason for. the application of strict compartmentation pro-
cedures to communications intelligence and other foreign.
intelligence activities reflects the extreme vulnerability
of the sources. Once an opposition becomes aware of which
of. its communications we are intercepting, it can take swift —
remedial action, and the. source can be forever lost.. :

_ “On Friday afternoon, copies of the secrecy oath’ used
~ by. the executive branch. with respect. tp three compartmented :
" access. control systems were made- available to you along with. ~.:
the. revised forms. developed for and ‘executed by certain members
of the staff of the:Senate Select Committee to Study Intelligenc
Activities... I. would: hope that the enclosed agreement modified -
for the House Select Committee, combining, all three
compartments: int one ‘document, would meet. * YOUr, particular .

Committee's use of the modified secrecy oath dealing. with
compartmented access, the following House and. Senate committee
have: obtained compartmented access. for their staffs, which
was: “granted after. the norma} p briefings and signing . of. the -

“May 1 ‘reiterate ‘the “points 1 made on priday: |

“ay No- material is being withheld, from members of
"the Committee. a ce. oo eat Se

,
?

fy, be We are prepared to and aia brief the staff of the

7 Committee on noncompartmented matters, based upon your
certification of their security. clearance and the fact -

‘that. they entered into an appropriate secrecy agreement
with you, a copy of which you provided. . :

c. .The compartmentation procedures of the ~- - oF
Intelligence Community have been established pursuant
‘to statute and National Security Council Intelligence
Directives. The simplest way for the staff to obtain
“access to this compartmented material would be to

. accept the normal secrecy arrangements as modified
'- in the enclosed. This would ensure against difficulties
in.access to such compartmented material throughout the



--- Page 22 ---
€

13-00000 ",  :

_ Intelligence’ Community. It is clear that the

-; obligations assumed here would run between the staff

. member and the Committee and in no way would provide
“any control. or influence over them by me or any,
"element of the Intelligence Community .

d. Tt would undoubtedly be. feasible to: develop FO,
"another procedure to ensure special protection of the so
-. sensitive matters currently included in the compart-. :

_Mented systems, "but this would involve review and
. discussions: with various interested parties which

would : undoubtedly take. some: time and delay your
- investigations . wd

i a hope you: will agree that this is the simplest and.
easiest manner. of solving a practical matter so that we can
proceed with. the substance. of your. investigations.



--- Page 23 ---
13-00000 « | ‘ !

2 penny
ae

“4-E.H.Knoc
‘1-SC/DCL



--- Page 24 ---
13-00000

“CONFIDENTIAL:

COMPARTMENTED INTELLIGENCE INDOCTRINATION” ~

r have been “informed ‘that pursuant to law (Sections 792,

: 793, 794, 795, 797 and 798 of. Title 18, United States Code) I
- am not: to discuss: ‘with or disclose to.any person any informatio
|: velating directly:or indirectly to the below identified compart
mented Programs, unless such person is currently authorized to
discuss or receive. such informa*ion ,r material of the particu
i Ii am.aware that: the responsibility of. —~ :

dge. ‘that it. is my ‘tesponsibility + to , inform |
yaeie ee the ‘contents’ of the above mentioned sections of |
itle:18, U.S. iCode,.'as. they pertain to performance of my
oa am.aware further that if a change in my status
renders: it no longer necessary for me to receive compartmented
intelligence, my name will -be ‘removed from the list of persons
uthori zed to i such | material. Sw ee. :

News 1 media reports concerning any of ‘these conpartrented
materials does not relieve” me of my" obligation under. the oath ;
siened below.» ets v. wilt

. ‘I acknowledge: tl
compar mented i systens or ‘Programs: os

ew FF 7

é

- OATH OF SECRECY

: I do solemnly swear “that I will not | discuss with or
disclose to any person, regardless of his official position .
- or status, any information relating directly or indirectly to
Compartmented Intelligence, any information derived therefrom,
‘. or the nature of the sources of such intelligence, until I
have ascertained that such ‘Person has been authorized to discuss: ’

-B-2 IMPDET
CL BY.

‘CONFIDENTIAL |

“2,



--- Page 25 ---
13-00000 « |

. CONFIDENTIAL

‘and handle this material, and that his authorization has not
been revoked, except. in the performance. of ny official duties.
‘on the staff of the House Select Committee on Intelligence and

in accordance with the requirements set forth in the rules of co

. such Committee.

Witness



--- Page 26 ---
: mo, : you for whatever use you care to make of it.

Te VURAL!
CE “RAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
- . WASHINGTON,D.C, 20505

HSC MAT. FURAN.
Review Staff: 75[2563
20 ) August 1975

Mr, A. Searle Field

Staff Director

Select Committee on Intelligence.
Room 232

Cannon House Office Building
Washington D.C. 20515

HS SECUR eiTy:

» Die o/s agpervat

eames

. Dear Mr, Field:

- Around the end of July, Me. Roeder, obviously impressed .

. “by: your admonitions about the need for security, asked ifI  -:
'. gould work up a package of guidance on how to handle classified -
documents, Our Office of Security put this together, and while
I think Mr, Roeder had in mind something more applicable to
an individual than to an office, I thought I would pass this on to

~~

; ‘Incidentally, we have not yet carried out the; /physical survey
'. of your quarters which you requested on 29 July, I have been
“in touch with Ms, Hess, and our Office of Security will conduct
| one as soon as she is ready, We may have some other recom-
mendations for your consideration when that is done. _

aru”

ne

J ae al Brown
Assistant to the Director

Attachment: als

ce: D/OS

NTOWAL SECURITY THFORMANON
Unauticrized Disclosure Sudject to
Criminal Sanctions,



--- Page 27 ---
13-00000 » .

:

RFRA

Protection of Classified Materials

. | 14 AUG 1975

|
MEMORANDUM FOR: The Review Staff

o| ATTENTION : Mr. Jerrold. B. Brown
: VIA : Acting Deputy Director for Administration
SUBJECT : House Select Committee on Intelligence -

| REFERENCE — Memo dtd 31 Jul 75 to D/Sec from Jerrold
oh ; , B. Brown, subject: Request for Security
| ; Aids ; : ; . ;

oo

H In accordance with the request in the referenced

i . memorandum for a "package" to be used by the House Select.

po : Committee on Intelligence for the protection of classified

— material, the attached suggestions are provided for your

i assistance. In view of the lack of a comprehensive phys-

ical security survey of the area which will be used to

a store the Committee's classified material, specific rec-
ommendations must be deferred. In this connection, we ;
plan to have Mr. Edward J. McGrath of the Physical Security
Division (extension 3494) meet with appropriate represent-
atives of the Committee for the specific purpose of con-
ducting a security survey of the proposed quarters in the
Rayburn Building. For your information, Mr. Searle Field,
Staff Director of the House Select Committee on Intelligence,

’ requested such a survey on 29 July 1975. Pending the re-
sults of this survey and its recommendations, the attached -
general physical security measures are recommended in an
effort to provide the requisite protection for the Com-
mittee's classified material.

. ? oe
Robert W. Gambino
Director of Security

_ Atts.
Distribution: , E3. IMPDET
Orig §& 2 - Adse_ . : CL BY 056966

1 - ADD/A
OS 5 12 065

CONFIDENTIAL


--- Page 28 ---
13-00000

SS.

———____
——_, ATTACHMENT


--- Page 29 ---
13-00000 » |

5.

CONFIDENTIAL

/ GENERAL SUGGESTIONS
. FOR THE
PROTECTION OF CLASSIFIED MATERIAL

Designate a Committee. member as the Security
Officer responsible for the overall control
handling and protection of the classified
material. ;

‘Establish and maintain a register of all
Committee personnel who are authorized to

review classified material and insure that
no unauthorized personnel will have access to
the material. :

Establish a central document control system
whereby all classified documents are properly
logged upon receipt and annotated as to-
disposition.

Designate a Document Control Clerk who will
be specifically responsible for the logging
and control of all classified material.
Appropriate records should be established

to reflect that all classified material is
properly logged in and out, by date and time, -
to authorized members of the Committee.

In the event material is designated as being:
of a codeword or compartmented nature, special
physical security features as enunciated by
the Ad Hoc Security Committes of the United
States Intelligence Board and later adopted
as policy should be adhered to. (Specifics
regarding these requirements will be provided

_in the course of the pending survey.)

All guards assigned to the physical security
control over the Committee's storage area
should be U. S. citizens and possess appro-
priate security clearances.

If feasible, a reading room should be es-
tablished within the designated storage area

CONFIDENTIAL


--- Page 30 ---
8.

$3.

10.

il.

13,

14,

CONFIDENTIAL

for the Committee's classified material, and
all research and review activities of the
material should be restricted to this area.

In those instances where the Committee meets

in Exscutive session, every effort should

be made to insure that the site being used has
been subjected to a technical security inspec-
tion to negate the possibility of unauthorized
transmitting or recording devices. This area
of concern could pose serious security deficien-
cies in the event the same area would be used
initially in public session and then closed for
the Executive session without such an inspection
being made.

Adequats safeguards should be utilized in the
transnission of classified material under the
cognizance of the Committee from one area to

~ another, ,

*, .

Reproduction of any portion of the Committee's
classified material should be prohibited
without the express approval of the Staff
Director. In this instance, notes, extracts,
summaries, etc., made from classified material
must also be provided the same degree of .
protection as that provided to the source
material, :

Access controls to the storage and reten- , :
tion area should be established to insure that
only authorized personnel are allowed entrance.

Storage of all classified material should be
within the designated area as opposed to any
areas or outsides offices. ;

Security protection should be provided to
all Committee transcripts during the tran-
scription process as well as during the
periods while they are in transit.

A security check procedure should be estab-
lished to inspect the areas where the Com-
mittee meets at the termination of each.
session to insure that no classified material

2

CONFIDENTIAL


--- Page 31 ---
15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

CONFIDENTIAL

or notes, etc., are inadvertently left un-
secured. (Attached are examples of Security
Check Sheets.)

_Arrangements should ba made to insure that

there are adequate facilities for the
destruction of classified waste material.

In this instance, such waste material should
be provided protection until its final
destruction.

Only approved classified material destruc-
tion methods should be utilized. (Details
regarding this can be obtained in the course
of the pending survey.)

ALL Committee personnel granted access to
Classified material by the Staff Director
should be briefed on their obligations end
responsibilities regarding the unauthorized
disclosure of such material.

Specific physical security recommendations —
applicable te the proposed storage area for the
Committee's classified material, consistent
with sound security principles, must be deferred
until the completion of the survey. This would
also include recommendations relative to the
type of storage containers which the Committee
proposes to use.

Pending the completion of a security survey at
the new storage site, it is suggested that the
protective measures currently in effect at the
temporary storage facility in Room 232, Cannon

'. Building, not be changed.

_ CONFIDENTIAL


--- Page 32 ---
13-00000

ATTACHMENT - a ; : Ce Se .
a nara
ee
¢

.
oft
a?
ary
* <?
ie
- , = “


--- Page 33 ---
SECURITY CHECK SHexT SECLwITY CHECK SHEET.

FROM: | NOs BUILOING SAFE NO.

TO LOCK
; TO CHECK

SAFES: DEPRESS CONTROL DRAWER LATCH WHILE DEPRESSING
EACH DRAWER LATCH ANO PULL OUT BOTH DRAWERS. ON
“HERRING-HALL-MARVIN® SAFES TURN ORAWER HANDLE TO RIGHT
(on new type, raise latch) AND PULL DRAWERS OUTWARD. .
VAULTS AND DOOR SAFES: TURN HANDLE BACK ANDO FORTH
WHILE PULLING OOOR OUTWARD. . .
ALARM SWITCHES: TURN TO “NIGHT” POSITION

CERTIFICATION

1 CERTIFY, BY MY INITIALS BELOW, THAT I HAVE OPENED OR
PROPERLY SECURED THIS VAULT, SAFE OR CABINET AND ALARM.

OPENED BY CLOSED sY CHECKED BY

-|f0.: Office of Security
THRU: Component Security Officer.

| TO LOCK
ROTATE DIAL FOUR CONSECUTIVE TURNS IN ONE DIRECTION

TO CHECK

SAFES: DEPRESS CONTROL ORAWER LATCH WHILE DEPRESSING
EACH ORAWER LATCH AND PULL OUT BOTH DRAWERS. ON
"HERRING-HALL-MARVIN” SAFES TURN DRAWER HANDLE TO RIGHT
(on new type, raise latch) AND PULL DRAWERS OUTWARD. .

VAULTS AND DOOR SAFES: TURN HANOLE BACK AND FORTH

WHILE PULLING DOOR OUTWARD. .
ALARM SWITCHES: TURN TO “NIGHT® POSITION

CERTIFICATION

Tt CERTIFY, BY MY INITIALS BELOW, THAT 1 HAVE OPENED OR
PROPERLY SECURED THIS VAULT, SAFE OR CABINET AND ALARM,

MONTH(S}

BL OFENED ay | cues ey | CHECKED BY | GUARD CHEEK |
E fnarvacs] tee [nttacg] rine [nirvacs] time [nirvana] TOME |

GUARD CHECK

jf HOA GTOS ASHAARH -- AMAH TION 772 - te ee een eee eee cee een ene

: 1384 108 ossoLeTe PREVIOUS EDITIONS


--- Page 34 ---
’
‘

Area Security Check Sheet

Items to be Checked

Desks (Including Drawers)
Tables (Including Drawers)
Chairs

Floor

Window Ledges

Typewriters

Stenotype Machines
Reproduction Equipment
Trash Receptacles

Charts, Exhibits,
‘Chalkboards

Notebooks, Paper Pads, etc.
(Check to insure that
imprints of classified
notes not present)

Checker



--- Page 35 ---
13-00000° | 4

a UNCLASSIFIED hye NAY sav ENTIAL CONFI, .ATIAL C1 secret

re ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET

SUBJECT: (Optional) House Select Committee on Intelligence -
Protection of Classified Materials

Director of Security _ 6777 Teh sath 7263 Ao hos W
; 14 AUG 1975
TO: (Officer ‘designation, room number, and

building) OFFICER'S COMMENTS (Number each comment to show from whom
INITIALS. to whom. Draw a line across column ofter each comment.)
RECEIVED | FORWARDED

Edward Ryan
DD/ Cogrdinator

7D-26, Hqs.

The Review Staff
6D- 0120 :

errold 8B. Brown

FORM 6] 0 USE PREVIOUS

rom eomeee’s (] secret © CRUEONEIDEN THe «= ) INTERNAL §=—)UUNCLASSIFIED


--- Page 36 ---
14 AUG 1975
MEMORANDUM FOR: The Review Staff
ATTENTION : Mr. Jerrold B.. Brown
VIA : Acting: Deputy Director for Administration
SUBJECT. . : House Select Committee on Intelligence -
Protection of Classified Materials
REFERENCE . : Memo dtd 31 Jul 75 to D/Sec from Jerrold
B. Brown, subject: Request for Security
Aids ~ ;

In accordance with the request in the referenced
memorandum for a "package" to be used by the House Select -
Committee on Intelligence for the protection of classified
material, the attached suggestions are provided for your
assistance. In view of the lack of a comprehensive phys-
ical security survey of the area which will be used to.
‘store the Committee's classified material, specific rec-
ommendations must be deferred. In this connection, we
pian to have Mr.. Edward J. McGrath of the Physical Security
Division (extension 3494) meet with appropriate represent-
atives of the. Committee for the specific purpose of con-
ducting a security survey of the proposed quarters in the .
Rayburn Building. For your information, Mr. Searle Field, |
Staff Director of the House Select Committee on Intelligence,
requested such a survey on 29 July 1975. Pending the re-
sults. of this survey and its recommendations, the attached
general physical security measures are recommended in an
effort to provide the requisite protection for the Com-
mittee's classified material. .

AE Lo OE E
Robert W. Gambino
Director of Security

Atts.
Distribution: E3 IMPDET
Orig § 2 - Adse CL BY 056966

1 - ADD/A
OS 5 12 065

- CONFIDENTIAL


--- Page 37 ---
epeid Brown

So SECRET

. THE DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

i
i

WASHINGTON, D. €.°20505

Intelligence Community Staff _ DCI/IC 75-2620
: 2 September 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR: Members of USIB’Ad Hoc Coordinating Group

SUBJECT : House Select Committee on Intelligence

Attached is a paper from the Chairman, USIB Security
- Committee, outlining security arrangements made by the House

‘Select Committee on Intelligence.

E Thine

: Jack E. Thomas
oa a : . : Ma. or] General, USAF (Ret. }
: Chie#/ Coordination Staff, ICS

Attachment

This Document May Be Downgraded
to Unclassified When Removed From
Attachment

chassiriza sy 320792
EXEM2T FROM GENERAL DECLASSIFICATION
SCIHEGULE CFE. 0, 1155%, EXEMPTION CATEGORY:
§ SBC. CQ, (3) or A) (circle one oF more)
“AUTOMATICALLY DECLASSIFIED ON

ate Impsssible to Determine

(unless impossible, insert date or event)

SECRET


--- Page 38 ---
- - SECRET
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD
SECURITY COMMITTEE

SECOM-D-105
2 September 1975.

MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, Coordination Staff, ICS

SUBJECT : House Select Committee on Intelligence

On 29 August 1975, Mr, Robert Gambino, Director of
Security/CIA; Mr. William H. Standiford, Deputy Chief, Physical

‘Security Division, Office of Security/CIA; and I viewed the

permanent space of the staff of the House Select Committee on
Intelligence at the invitation of Mr. A. Searle Field, Staff Director
of the Committee. We believe the security arrangements made
and being made are satisfactory for the storage of compartmented

-information.” Attachéd is a memorandum outlining the security (1 tet

arrangements.

ral

furaché Mima
Donald E. Moore
Chairman

Attachment -

This Document May Be Downgraded
to Unclassified When Removed From
Attachment

cuassirien sy 3290793
EXCMPT FROM GENERAL DECLASSIFICATION
SCHEOULE CEE, 0, 11953, EXEMPTION CATEGORY:
§ SEL » (3) of (4) (cirete one or more)
AUTOIRATICALLY DECLASSIFIED ON

Date Impossible to Determine


--- Page 39 ---
.. to, these, safes.

nr) A010)

‘ 2 September 1975

House Select Committee on Intelligence

1, The House Select Committee staff is now located in its
permanent space, B-316, Rayburn Building. Ms. Jacqueline Hess
is the Security Officer, telephone number 225-9696.

2, The only entrance is through B-316 and the space consists
of several adjoining offices all served by an inner walkway. A member
of the Capitol Police is stationed at a guard desk inside the door and
admits only authorized individuals. Visitors must sign in with the
guard, who’ calls the appropriate staff employee and visitors are
allowed access to the space only in the company of staff employees.
‘Interview rooms-are located in the staff area but separated from the

_ work area. During non-work hours two guards are on duty in the

space.

3. All classified material is kept in a secure area at the

“Arear of thé space with | one éntfance to the secure : oom, ‘This room ,

is to be locked at all times when specified,.employees are not on
duty in the room. At the present time, Ms. Hess is the only one
who will be able to open the secure area and unless circumstances

‘change this arrangement will continue.

4. All classified material is kept in this secure area, and
stored in approved safes with three-way combination locks. At
present, Ms. Hess is the only person who possesses the combination

a ra Peon Pos ewe we . : one

5. Reading of classified documents is to. be in a reading area,
consisting of several tables, in the secure area. A staff employee
desiring access to a classified document must make a request for
it, Ms. Hess then obtains it, the employee reads it in the secure
area and it is then returned to Ms. Hess for return to the safe
cabinet, Staff employees have been advised that notes.taken from
classified documents and material prepared from such notes or the
documents must respect the original classification and receive
corresponding security. Copying of classified documents is to be
strictly controlled, is to be done only on a copying device located
in staff space, and copies are to receive the same security protection
as the original. :

PTION CATEGORY:

(3) oe (A) (circle one or more)

TICALLY DECLASSIFIED ON



--- Page 40 ---
SECRET

6. The entire space has been swept and plans call for
additional periodic sweeping. There is a motion detector in the
secure area which rings at the guard desk in the staff area and
also at the main office of the Capitol Police in the Rayburn Building,
Tests have been made of this device and the response by the Capitol
Police was immediate. Two doors which normally serve as access’
to the secure area from space occupied by other House Committees
have been secured from the inside and alarms are to be installed —
on these doors. , .

7. Mr. A. Searle Field, Staff Director, and Ms. Hess:
advised that staff employees have been alerted to telephone security
and this will be continually stressed. Also they have tried to instill
strong security consciousness among all the staff. Mr. Field
indicated that at present it is not expected the staff will total more
than 35,

SECRET



--- Page 41 ---
House Armed Services
Subcommittee on
Intelligence

and Military Application of Nuclear Energy’

The Subcommittee on Intelligence and.Military Application of Nuclear
Energy is newly established and the successor to the Special Subcommittee
on Intelligence Chaired by Representative Lucien N. Nedzi. The new Sub-
committee has picked up the responsibility of the soon to be abolished
Joint Committee on Atomic Energy. and is expanding its staff accordingly.
Representative Melvin Price's Chairmanship is due to his long years of
membership on the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy. There will be an ever-
increasing involvement by the Subcommittee in military application of
nuclear energy and-we undoubtedly will be called upon to provide required
foreign intelligence.

* Members of the Subcommittee are as follows:

Melvin Price (D., I11.), Chairman
. Charles H. Wilson (D., Calif.)
Jack Brinkley (D., Ga.) «
Dan Daniel (D., Va.)
G. V. Montgomery (D., Miss.)
- Ronald V. Dellums (D., Calif.) ’
Bob Carr (D., Mich.) ~
Charles E. Bennett (D., Fla.)
Samuel S. Stratton (D., N.Y.)
Bob Wilson (R., Calif.)
William L. Dickinson (R., Ala.)
Marjorie S. Holt (R., Md.)
Robert W. Daniel, Jr. (R., Va.)

Staff of the Subcommittee are as follows:

John Ford, Staff Director
William H. Hogan, Counsel
Adam J. Klein, Professional

Mr. Ford is Staff Director of the full Committee and replaced
Mr. Frank Slatinshek, former Chief Counsel, who retired. Mr.-Hogan is
Counsel of the Subcommittee and will be the principal staff man on Agency
matters. Adam Klein is a specialist in atomic energy matters.



--- Page 42 ---
ye

ADNEUISTEA ATE ITER mn “USE ony

PROBLEMS

A. House Subcommittee on \ Intelligence and Military Application of
Nuclear Energy . .

Former Chairman Lucien N. Nedzi fully exercised his perogatives
as Chairman of the Subcommittee on Intelligence and we could look to
him for support in any problems developing with other committees and
other members of the House not on the Subcommittee. Based on the
reactions of Chairman Melvin Price in the few instances that we have
approached him in this Congress for assistance, it is quite evident
that he is not the dominant personality as was Chairman Nedzi and will
not stick his neck out to defend the Agency. Nor does it appear that
the new staff director will be of the forceful personality as was
Frank Slatinshek who was very helpful in a number of problems. A few
“weeks ago former Chairman Nedzi suggested that we resolve a problem
involving Representative Donald M. Fraser by going to Speaker O'Neill.
This may have been his indication to us that we may have to look to
House leadership to resolve problems. Mr. Nedzi also suggested that we
contact someone in the White House on a problem. We.may be faced with
needed White House Support ona problem before we approach the leader—
ship- a .

B. House Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control
?

The extent of Chairman Lester L. Wolff's oversight of the Agency
in its narcotics collection activities still remains a looming problem.
As indicated by the request for the seal, Mr. Wolff intends to extend
the Agency's activities to where there is maximum effective collection
* of foreign intelligence on narcotics trafficking leading to arrest and
conviction without regard to the Agency's statutory prohibitions. The
only solution rests with the Attorney General and the White House giving
the Agency clear and precise guidelines to operate in this area which
the Agency can then point to in any disputes that may arise with the
Select Committee as to what the Agency's role should be.

ADBURISTRATIVE INTERAL USE. GHLY


--- Page 43 ---
__DMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS *;
House of Representatives ~

' DEMocR nts (95th
soe

JAMIE L. WHITTEN, Mississippi
ROBERT L. F. SIKES, Florida
EDWARD P. BOLAND, Massachusetts
WILLIAM H. NATCHER, Kentucky
DANIEL J. FLOOD, Pennsylvania
TOM STEED, Oklahoma

GEORGE E. SHIPLEY, Illinois
JOHN M. SLACK, West Virginia
JOHN J. FLYNT, Jr., Georgia
‘NEAL SMITH, Iowa :
ROBERT N. GIAIMO, Connecticut
JOSEPH P. ADDABBO, New York
JOHN J. McFALL, California
EDWARD J. PATTEN, New Jersey
CLARENCE D. LONG, Maryland
SIDNEY R. YATES, Illinois
FRANK E. EVANS, Colorado
DAVID R. OBEY, Wisconsin
EDWARD R. ROYBAL, California
LOUIS STOKES, Ohio

GUNN McKAY, Utah

TOM BEVILL, Alabama

BILL CHAPPELL, Florida

BILL D. BURLISON, Missouri

BILL ALEXANDER, Arkansas
EDWARD I. KOCH, New York

GEORGE H. MAHON, Texas, Chairman TP ab

Congress, Ist Session) ;
- can

———<$<<—_—_______—
ELFORD A. CEDERBERG, Michigan
ROBERT H. MICHEL, Illinois

SILVIO 0. CONTE, Massachusetts
JOSEPH M. McDADE, Pennsylvania
MARK ANDREWS, North Dakota
JACK EDWARDS, Alabama

ROBERT C. McEWEN, New York
JOHN T. MYERS, Indiana

J. KENNETH ROBINSON, Virginia
CLARENCE E. MILLER, Ohio
LAWRENCE COUGHLIN, Pennsylvania
C. W. BILL YOUNG, Florida

JACK F. KEMP, New York

WILLIAM L. ARMSTRONG, Colorado
RALPH S. REGULA, Ohio

CLAIR W. BURGENER, California
GEORGE M. O’BRIEN, Illinois
VIRGINIA SMITH, Nebraska

Keto F, MAINLAND
Clerk and Staff Director

YVONNE BRATHWAITE BURKE, California

JOHN P. MURTHA, Pennsylvania
BOB TRAXLER, Michigan .
ROBERT DUNCAN, Oregon
JOSEPH D. EARLY, Massachusetts
MAX BAUCUS, Montana
CHARLES WILSON, Texas

LINDY (MRS. HALE) BOGGS, Louisiana

ADAM BENJAMIN, Jr., Indiana
NORMAN D. DICKS, ‘Washington

AGRICULTURE & RELATED
AGENCIES

DEFENSE

DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
FOREIGN OPERATIONS

HUD—INDEPENDENT AGENCIES:
INTERIOR

WELFARE
‘LEGISLATIVE

LABOR—HEALTH, EDUCATION &

MILITARY CONSTRUCTION

" PUBLIC WORKS

STATE, JUSTICE, COMMERCE
& JUDICIARY

TRANSPORTATION

TREASURY-POSTAL SERVICE— .
GENERAL GOVERNMENT

Subcommittees
Whitten, Evans, Burlison, Baucus, Traxler, Alexander, Sikes,

Natcher
Andrews, Robinson, Myers

Mahon, Sikes, Flood, Addabbo, McFall, Flynt, Giaimo, Chappell,
jurlison
Edwards, Robinson, Kemp

- Natcher, Giaimo, Wilson, McKay, Burke, Benjamin

Burgener, Kemp

- Long, Obey, Koch, Wilson, Yates, Burke, Roybal, Stokes

Young, Conte, Smith

Boland, Traxler, Baucus, Stokes, Bevill, Boggs, Burlison,
Alexander
Coughlin, McDade, Young

Yates, McKay, Long, Evans, Murtha, Duncan, Dicks, Whitten
McDade, Regula, Armstrong

Flood, Natcher, Smith, Patten, Obey, Roybal, Stokes, Early
Michel, Conte, O’Brien .

Shipley, Benjamin, Giaimo, McFall, Murtha, ‘Traxler
Armstrong, Coughlin, Cederberg

McKay, Sikes, Murtha, Steed, Long, Chappell
McEwen, Regula ’ , ® prel

Bevill, Boland, Whitten, Slack, Boggs, Dicks, Shipley, Chappell
Myers, Burgener, Smith

Slack, Smith, Flynt, Alexander, Burke, Early
Cederberg, Andrews, Miller

McFall, Steed, Koch, Duncan, Benjamin, Smith, Addabbo, Evans
Conte, Edwards, O’Brien

Steed, Addabbo, Roybal, Patten, Boland, Flynt
Miller, Metwen , mm

NOTE: Mr. Mahon, as Chairman of the Committee, and Mr. Cederberg, as Ranking Minority

Member, are ex officio members of all subcommittees of which they are not regular members.

GPO = 86-238-b

January £6, 1977.



--- Page 44 ---
13-00000

a  Quate alon.
: SS | v
House Appropriations Committee team 4

Room'2 D 0117. Telephones: 5848, 5849 (B) and 1570 (R) &&0/ Gy.

“Leonard M. (Bucky) WALTERS,

Badge: blue House Committée
Clearances: SI, TK,’ BYECOM

G.
Charles #. (Chuck) HAYNES
Badge: green. no: escort

Clearances: ‘TK, BYECOM

Eugene B. MILHEL
Badge: ue te se Co ittee
Clearar es: I, TK, /BYECOM

George C. BAIRD (Carter)
Badge: blue House Committee
Clearances: SI, TK, BYECOM

Leon F. (Frank) SCHWARTZ
Badge: blue House Committee

John LayTen

Supervisory officials of HAC Surveys §& Investigations Staff
(not to be stationed at Has bldg, but may visit from time to
time): :

Cornelius: R. (Lefty) ANDERSON, Chief

Badge: green no-escort

Marion S. RAMEY, Deputy Chief
Badge: blue House Committee
OX 7-9371

James Brian HYLAND

Badge: mene blue House Committee


--- Page 45 ---
o

2 August 1976

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

SUBJECT: Initial Meeting with House Appropriations
Committee Survey Group

1. ‘An initial session was held on 30 July 1976 of
about one and a half hours with six persons from the Surveys
and Investigations Staff of the House Appropriations
Committee, to-discuss the purpose of their survey of the
Directorate of Operations and to propose some arrangements
to govern their access to Agency personnel and documents.
The following attended:

Mr. Cornelius (Lefty) Anderson, Chief of
Surveys and Investigations Staff

Mr. Marion Ramey, Deputy

Mr. Leonard (Bucky) Walters, who will head the
team inspecting the Directorate of Operations

Mr. Charles (Chuck) Havnes, team member

Mr. Eugene Wilhelm, team member (former
Agency employee)

Mr. George C. Baird, team member

Attending for the Agency were:

Mr. Theodore Shackley, who chaired the meeting
Mr. Robert Gambino

Mr. Lyle Miller

Mr. Thomas B. Abernathy

Mr. Richard Point

Mr. Philip F. Fendig

2. The meeting followed reasonably well the attached
agenda, which was made available to all at the beginning of
the meeting. The following paragraphs summarize the
important points covered.

3. Scope: Mr. Shackley asked the group to define its
mission, noting some of the topics mentioned in recent
conversations with Mr. Snodgrass suggested particular
interests whereas the Committee's report on the FY 77 budget


--- Page 46 ---
had suggested a different orientation. Mr. Anderson,
characterizing the enterprise as a survey rather than an.
investigation, stated that his instructions were from the
Chairman of the Committee: -they called for a detailed
review of the operation of the Directorate in its entirety.
Mr. Walters would mention certain particular interests,
noted below, but that did not set limits to the ultimate
scope of the survey, Mr. Walters then took over:

~a. He expects to do a complete review, from
the managerial and substantive standpoint, of the
Directorate. His initial interests indicated an
auditor's approach to these questions - how budgets
are compiled, examination of accounting procedures
for regular and special funds, cost systems and
the like.

b. He went on, however, to the management
aspects which they would also pursue to
determine the results of the Directorate's
operations - the value of intelligence produced
versus the costs involved in procuring it, and
areas of possible overlap in collection with
the military and with NSA.

c. Specific areas which would be explored,
given, as examples, included contingency reserves,
the "special retirement fund" (presumably
referring to MHMUTUAL), the procedures for
reimbursing the State Department for cover and
support, proprietaries (how created, their
justification, value and effectiveness), safe-
houses and."CA cadres."

Mr. Anderson reluctantly agreed to Mr. Shackley's request
for a memorandum spelling out these objectives in sufficient

detail so that we could take the managerial steps necessary

to resolve any conflicts in the priority of the time of our
managers and senior operations officers who would be

involved in current operations as well as overlapping
inquiries from other groups concurrently overseeing the
Directorate. Mr. Anderson also asked for any ongoing studies
which the Directorate might have which would aid the team

in its work.



--- Page 47 ---
4. Duration: The team's first objective will be to
render an interim report to the Committee by 1 January 1977,
in order to meet the mandate that the survey be used in.
considering the Agency's FY 1978 budget. The team wishes
to start work immediately and will consist of either six or
seven members who will occupy. space in Headquarters building
and presumably do most of their work here; it was brought
out, however, that the team would also interview users of
our intelligence and other collectors. There was ambiguity
in the projection of the total length of the survey; I
interpreted Mr. Anderson's remarks to indicate that he
expected the team to be with us for most of calendar year

9

5S. . Securit Mr. Anderson explained the arrangement
by which the Comittee limits access by even the members of
the Subcommittee to the reports of his group; they must be
reviewed in a specified drea and they are stored, in very
limited numbers, in the tower of the Capitol in the special
facilities there for the Joint Atomic Energy Committee of.
Congress. Mr. Gambino explained the arrangements for badges,
certification of. clearances, and provided for the team's
consideration a copy of the "non-disclosure agreement" which
we would like members to sign. There was considerable
discussion, and some objection, to the issuance of blue

‘badges which will provide access to virtually all parts of

the building but which must be turned in and picked up at
the entrance each day. This arrangement was reluctantly

“accepted but it was made clear. at lunch and in later

'

discussion with the team and with Mr. Anderson they are
unhappy with this slight infringement on their convenience
and physical access to the building.

6. Access: Of more concern was the Agency position
that the SA7DO/0 would serve as a control point for the
team's further access to individuals and documents in the
Directorate. The requirement was explained in terms of the
need to record, against later requirements such as in fact
now in progress stemming from another investigation, the
names, subject matter and general content of matters discussed
by Agency officers with team members. The requirement to
"monitor'' was explained as an effort to keep this type of
record, rather than to impose a third party from the office
of SA/DO/O on all interviews; the latter was clearly
considered by the team to be an unreasonable intrusion. It
was agreed after some discussion that we would proceed with



--- Page 48 ---
system outlined in the attached agenda, and that we would
reconsider procedures later if they seemed clearly to be
unwieldy. . We anticipated, however, that once the team
splits into smaller groups as is planned, and pursues
particular areas of inquiry, it will be possible to evolve

a workable system which meets ‘the objectives. of both parties.

7. Other: There appears to be no difficulty in
protecting identitiés of sources, providing documents in
sanitized form, ‘maintaining notes only in this building and
at the appropriate security level and introducing some
officers under cover in alias where necessary; all these
points were noted and none was objected to. Space and
other facilittes may be cramped but it appears to be possible
to provide adequate space adjacent to the SA/DOQ/O offices.
Mr. Anderson began by noting the outstanding cooperation on
the Angola and COMINT surveys done in the building (in which
relatively free access to personnel and files had been
afforded his team), and ended by stating that the coming
survey was not a witch hunt nor an investigation of abuses
and that therefore he believed that such access could have
very beneficial results for the Agency. It was agreed to
begin the survey formally with a briefing by the DDO or
ADDO on 3 or 4 August 1976. Mr. Walters with several team
members will, however, set up shop on 2 August to review
such general briefing papers as Mr, Fendig can make
available to them at that time.

(signed)
Philip F. Fondig.

Philip F. Fendig
SA/DO/O:PFFendig:j1 (7368/1398)

Distribution: (all w/att)
Orig & 1 - DDO

oe 1 - ADDO
1 - OLC (Mr. Miller)
1 - D/SEC (Mr. Gambino)
1 - COMPT (Mr. Point)
1 - SSA/DDO
1 - SA/DDCI (Mr. Bolten)
4 - SA/DO/O

E2 IMPDET
CL BY 012860



--- Page 49 ---
SECRET

AGENDA FOR MEETING WITH
HOUSE APPROPRIATIONS COMMITTEE STAFF
30 JULY 1976

[Inarlly

Request statement from Committee representatives of
scope, duration and proposed procedure to be
followed by Committee investigators.

Discussion of arrangements for investigation:

1, Facilities: DDO will provide office space,
telephones and secure storage facilities for
investigators. Parking spaces and cafeteria
priveleges will also be provided.

2. Security:

a. Badges allowing unescorted access to
Headquarters building will be issued,
to be picked up and left with
receptionist. Agreement to be signed
when badge issued, per current
procedures governing all Congressional
staffs.

b. Clearances through necessary level to
be obtained prior to commencement of
briefings or interviews, level to be
determined on: basis of first meeting. .

3. Access:

a. Orientation briefings on Directorate
and its subdivisions to be offered.

b. Access to personnel and docume s within.
gency to be controlled by office of - ;

SA/DO/O, which will maintain record of
. all_interviews and_of documents provided.

c. Documents to be provided upon specific
request for study within building.

They will be sanitized to protect sources
nd methods using guidelines previously
established for HSC and SSC.

eeeee seis SSS eee



--- Page 50 ---
Documents to be exam

examined by the ;
investigation team within Headquarters"
building. If copies of documents are
desired, investigators will request

them from SA/DO/0O who will see that

they are provided promptly in
‘ appropriate classified and sanitized

form. If required by the Committee
(outside Headquarters building), same
procedure will be followed but will
be subject to review by SA/DO/O.
ee ee eS

Formal questions are to be put_in
writing in order to provide proper
and full context so that most

complete and pertinent answers can
be provided.

SA/DO/0 to monitor all interviews. az
ee eee eee

Discussion of note-taking and reports:

(1) Maintenance of proper security
and classification

(2) Notes to retain same level of

security Classification as
documents or interviews on which

they based.



--- Page 51 ---
.

~ ’ ADMIY “STRATIVE-INTERNAL USE ONI™:

This notice expires 31 January 1978 .

DON 5~218

DDO NOTICE : GENERAL
NO. 5-218 : 4 August 1976

3.

SURVEY BY MEMBERS OF
THE HOUSE APPROPRIATIONS COMMITTEE STAFF

GENERAL

Members of the staff of the House Appropriations Com-
mittee began an extensive examination of the Directo-
rate of Operations beginning the week of 2 August 1976.
They expect that it will take approximately 17 months
to complete this study. They state their activities
are necessary to better understand the appropriations
process. They emphasize that their objective is not
to dig out evidence of wrongdoing or improper activi-
ties. The staff members’ activities will be coordi-
nated through SA/D0/O. The following paragraphs -
attempt to anticipate the procedures necessary to
exercise orderly control over the staff's activities. .
These procedures may be subject to modification as
future experience may dictate.

LOCATION

Members of this Congressional staff have been issued
blue badges bearing the words "House Committee" which
permit unescorted access to all non-specially controlled
areas of the building, including the main cafeteria.
The staff will be provided suitable private office
space in Room 2 D 0117, adjacent to the office of the
SA/DO/O, which will be relocated in Room 2 D 0109 as
of 6 August 1976. It is expected that they will initi-
ally have a greater interest in interviews than they
do in documents. Since they will have adequate office
space, interviews should be conducted within their

‘premises. .

“CONTROL OF DOCUMENTS

a. The staff is expected to make any requests for.
documentation to the SA/DO/O. Individual officers

ADMINISTRATIVEINTERNAL, USE_ONLY._



--- Page 52 ---
; ye ADMIN**TRATIVE-INTERNAL USE ONLY --
DON 5-218

DDO NOTICE ; GENERAL

NO. 5-218 4 August 1976

h,

who receive requests from staff members for docu-
ments should ask that the request be put to the
SA/DO/O. All documents provided to the SA/DO/O
for transmittal to the staff will be logged in by
the SA/DO/O and logged back to the component after
the staff has completed its study. ‘The SA/DO/0
will not, as a matter of routine procedure, retain
a copy of the document concerned.

All documents will be properly sanitized to protect
sources and methods. The staff has indicated that
it does not anticipate any need for such detail
and accepts the principle of sanitization. Any
questions concerning the degree of sanitization
should be referred to the SA/DO/O. Ground rules
for sanitization are similar to those applied
during the activities of the Select Committees.
General guidelines will be provided separately.

On receipt of a document back from the SA/DO/O

the recipient should indicate the date received,
and that it had been made available to the staff.
The document should be retained by the recipient
in the form in which it was provided to the staff
for possible further reference; the record copy
of the document should also reflect the fact that
a sanitized copy was provided to the staff. Any
further copies of documents requested by the staff
will be made only by the office of the SA/DO/O.

INTERVIEWS

ae

A representative from the office of the SA/DO/0

_ will not necessarily be present during interviews.

All interviews should be requested by the staff
through the SA/D0/O. The SA/DO/O will maintain

a record of the date of interview; the name of
the person interviewed, arid by whom; the alias

if one is used; and the subjects discussed. A
form will be provided to the interviewee to record

2
ADMINISTRATIVE-INTERNAL USE ONLY



--- Page 53 ---
i a ADMI?"STRATIVE-INTERNAL USE ONY.
DON 5-218
DDO NOTICE ; GENERAL
NO. 5-218 ; ; ; 4 August 1976

the essential facts. He should retain one copy
for possible future reference and one copy should
be forwarded to the SA/D0/0.

b. It is recognized that the badge access and the
length of the stay in the building by the staff
members may lead to unscheduled contacts. If
such contacts are connected with the official
duties of the staff, then appropriate comments
should be forwarded to SA/DO/O on the form cited
above. Officers should be careful not to allow
conversations to drift to areas of interest not
covered by official interviews. If this does take
place, however, we shall rely on the officer
concerned to inform the SA/DO/O0 of these develop~
ments. :

5. SECURITY

The blue badge should be sufficient to indicate that’
staff members should be treated as visitors in the
presence of persons not connected with their official
duties. Persons introduced wmder alias should be
careful that the alias is protected if a chance
meeting takes place in the presence of other col-
leagues. In this connection, persons interviewed
should be careful not to expose associates who have
not been interviewed.

William W. Wells _
Deputy Director for Operations

A/DIG/ (Tu. ath) (PQs 76

cg .

3

ADMINISTRATIVE-INTERNAL USE ONLY



--- Page 54 ---
7 CONFIDENTIAL

27 August 1976

MEMORANDUM FOR: Chiefs of Divisions ‘and Staffs

FROM : Philip F. Fendig
SA/DO/0
SUBJECT : Guidance for Interviews with House
Appropriations Committee Staff
REFERENCE - : DON 5-218, 4 August 1976

io

1. You have been scheduled at the time indicated on
the cover sheet of this memorandum for a briefing to be
given to the five members of the Surveys and Investigations
Staff team from the House Appropriations Committee. The
subjects which the team would like you to cover are contained
in the memorandum distributed prior to the DDO staff meeting
on 25 August 1976 and discussed at that meeting. I have
explained to the Surveys and Investigations team that topic e
(personnel policy and practices) will be discussed at a-
separate briefing to be given by the Chief, Career Management
Group. You should touch on the other topics suggested in the
memorandum mentioned above. ;

2. -General guidelines are. contained in reference
notice. The following may be helpful, however, in preparing
your briefing. Our general intention is to be as forth-.
coming as possible while drawing the line clearly at any
information which would lead to the identification of a
specific source, intelligence method, cooperating person or
group with which the.Agency has a relationship of confidence,
or confidential matter involving a cooperating foreign
intelligence service. The fact of liaison with foreign
services can in most cases be acknowledged, but details of
the relationship and the subject matter of joint or shared
operations should not be disclosed.

3. In the briefing contemplated. on management policies
and practices, most of the above sensitive areas would not
appear to arise, but you may find that questions will tend
to bring out some more sensitive areas and these should be
deferred with an agreement of looking into the possibility of'
providing further information later. The staff has already
had access to basic budgetary material, including funds and

CONFIDENTIAL



--- Page 55 ---
— GUINFIDENTIAL

personnel strengths broken down by component,.and a listing
by cryptonyms and funding levels of all OPACTS. They have
been given a briefing on the current organization of the
Directorate of Operations and are aware that its staff
elements will shortly be reorganized. They have a listing
of all overseas stations and bases. If you have further
questions on material already provided to the Committee,
please check with this office.

4. Most of the briefings are scheduled to take place
in room 2 D 0117; if possible, a member of my staff will be
present. We would appreciate, however, a short Memorandum
' for the Record, using the attached "Interview Form" as a
general guide. Space is somewhat limited, but you should
bring any. supporting personnel you desire to have participate
in your briefing. The Surveys and Investigations team is
aware that aliases may be used by those with solid cover
status; please’ advise this office if any persons intend to
use an alias during these briefing sessions.

5. We will be happy to assist in any way, including .
follow-up matters which may be developed in the course of
these briefings.

att

E2 IMPDET

‘CONFIDENTIAL CL BY 012860



--- Page 56 ---
Ca

August 18, 1976

MEMORANDUM FOR; Mr. Philip F. Fendig
SA/DO/0

FROM pt. M. Walters, Staff Member

House Appropriations Committee
Surveys and Investigations Staff

Request arrangement for comprehensive briefings with >
appropriate officials regarding the subjects outlined below
be provided to HAC S&I Staff members George C. Baird and
Leon F. Schwartz. .

lL. Paramilitary Covert Action Cadre

Provide in this briefing data relating to the
organization, utilization and cost data.for this activity
for the periods FY 74, 75, 76 and projected data for FY 77
and FY 78. Organizational data should include manning and
equipment levels for the aforementioned periods.

2. Reorganization of the Directorate of Operations

Briefing should include rationale behind the proposed
reorganization and manpower and dollar savings to be effected
by such a change. If additional expenditures in either
dollars or manpower. positions are involved, justification
should accompany the presentation. Explain in detail how the
Directorate of Operations plans to absorb the FY 77 loss of
100 manpower positions, if imposed in the pending Appropriations
Bill.

3. The Special Projects Group

Explain the rationale behind the transfer of Israel
from the Near East Division and providing it with special
status by placing it directly under DDO. Additional manpower
and dollar costs accompanying this change should be addressed.

4. Coordination Within the Intelligence Community

Briefing should show the identity and purposes of the
various task groups established (both within CIA and community-


--- Page 57 ---
ev

wide) which have been specifically established to deal with |

the collection vs. analysis problem. Impacts and changes
brought about or anticipated within DO as a result of these
groups' a¢tions should be covered.

5. Management Policies and Practices of Each DO Staff

‘and Division, (a separate briefin " each) includin ut
pa ae tg SRN STE Ut
“not: limited to:

.a. Overview of role of staff or division

b.. Decision-making processes and how coordinated
in DO, CIA and intelligence community

c. Organizational structure

d. Program development, and execution from
initiation to budgeting to implementation, including
development of annual plans, their flexibility, and degree
of autonomy of case officers, chiefs of stations, desk

officers and division or staff directors.

e. Personnel policies and practices including
recruitment, training promotion, position classification,
establishment of station complements and rotational policies.

f. Management and accounting controls to assure
compliance with laws, executive orders, policies and
regulations-and assurance that funds and other assets are
properly used, expended and receipted for.

While the order of arranging the presentations is not
critical, it is suggested that, if possible, item (1.) be
presented earliest and that item (5.) be instituted the week
of August 30. Please coordinate with either Mr. Raird or
myself for prompt scheduling of these sessions. Also, it
would be appreciated if a copy of charts or other documentary
material used in the presentations could be provided to the
attendees during each briefing session.



--- Page 58 ---
13-00000

|S pom nuhecr Cun hee )

a
“t

_SENDER WILL CHECK CLASSIFICA

[ft uncrassirieo [| Conr
OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP

NAME AND ADDRESS | oare | INITIALS

|e pewoe ||
Pp

i TOP AND BOTTOM

:
:
2

[action ss 5 s| =~ DIRECT REPLY =| | PREPARE REPLY
PAPPROVAL |_| DISPATCH | «| RECOMMENDATION -
[comment | tet

[| cONcurRENce |_| INFORMATION |_|

Fon yun nfo Shaye slierhil pepe
ber POLO 76-3259 7 26 Mee 7E
Loruany tia AIBN frorin with —
Me SNODERASS om MBO.

Clan th taet a4 on pope fron, Ge
pun tind hy Lhe. Crile, ov The.

FOLD HERE TO RETURN TO SENDER

| FROM: NAME, ADDRESS AND PHONENO. | bate |

LAE Oe 10 Yyf76
[UNCLASSIFIED | J CONFIDENTIAL | __[ SECRET _|
(40)

roam xo. 237 Use previous editions



--- Page 59 ---
13-00000

: “a wm

in attempting to be both forthcoming and helpful to him and the

sCommittee in understanding the DDO's problems. At the same time

‘Mr. Snodgrass pointed out that while he had no quarrel with Mr. Shackley,
he continued to be irritated with the totality of the Avency's attitude toward
providing him with data. Mr. Snodgrass then launched into a long litany
‘on how the Agency had not been responsive in terms of his needs as he
perceived them in the time frame February to May 1976. With thatas a
backdrop Mr. Snodgrass then launched into his inquiry as to why the Agency
was not willing to give him full access to Management by Objective docu-
ments. The dialogue which followed on this topic had a natural ebb and
flow to it, but the key point that emerged from this is that Mr. Snodgrass
continues to feel that unless he can see the Management by Objective
documents he will not be able to have a firm understanding of DDO map-

} power allocation procedures. Secondly, Mr. Snodgrass claims that CIA's
position that it will show Management by Objective documents to members
of the Committee and not the Staff_is an obstructignist tactic. His point.
being that the members of the Committee do not have the time to look at

such documents and they thus depend on the Committee Staff for this type
of substantive review. According to Mr. Snodgrass this means that if_the

Agency will not provide data to the Staff, it is in fact denying information
to the Committee members. Attempts were made by Mr. Shackley to show
low men of good will on both sides of this question could have an honest
difference of opinion on the issue. In this framework Mr. Shackley re-
iterated the DDO position that access to Management by Objective docu-

ments by Mr. Snodgrass would impact adversely on the whale question of
sources hods as well as the integrity of the reporting system. AS
a followup to this position an effort was made to find out exactly what it
was about the DDO manpower allocation system that Mr. Snodgrass did
not understand and which he thought he might find out about from an |
examination of the Management by Objective documents. it was hoped
that through this line of inquiry an alternate approach could.be discovered
which would enable us to deal with Mr. Snodgrass'.problems. Our probes
in this direction were unsuccessful in clarifying the issue. One can only
conclude that Mr. Snodgrass is committed to finding some sort ofa
formula orequation which will enable him to test our manpower aliscation /
system, "We have repeatedly outlined to him the variable factors that go

SECRET



--- Page 60 ---
13-00000

\-

into making judgments on operational deployment of manpower such as

———
wht targets are in a country, what are the

ina
particular country, what is the operational environment in the country

i.e., permissive or not, what are the cover possibilities, what are our
liaison equities, and what are our needs for regional =appert froma
particular country. These explanations are taken aboard by Mr. Snodgrass,
but he is looking for somethin se which has less variables in it when,

in fact, there is no magic formula for determining how one gets people to

commit treason. This portion of the meeting ultimately ended on a friendly
note but left unresolved the question of what was it that Mr. Snodgrass

’ really wanted on the issue of manpower allocations and what could CIA tell

him that we haven't already told him. (ACTION REQUIRED: Mr. Snodgrass
is currently preoccupied with drafting his report on the House Appropria-
tions Committee Mark-up of the DDO FY 77 budget. Once this task is
completed Mr. Chin, OLC, will return-to see Mr. Snodgrass and will try -
to obtain an elaboration of what specifically are the manpower issues that
trouble Mr. Snodgrass. In this context Mr. Chin has been asked to try to

determine if a review, position-by-position, of two or three typical Stations
within the DDO mi ive Mr. Smt rass the insight into manpower allo-
cations that he is currently seeking. )

9. Comment, In net assessment terms one would have to conclude
that the 25 May meeting achieved the optimum that could be expected from
this kind of an encounter. On the one hand the attached briefing book which
was examined by Mr. Snodgrass was accepted by the latter as a first rate
product. For this the A gency gets high marks. On the other hand, the
Management by Objective system, because he can't see the documents,
leaves Mr. Snodgrass frustrated and irritated. This evokes acrimonious
complaints from Mr. Snodgrass with the end result being that the burden
for seeking a solution to a problem created by Mr. Snodgrass is placed on
the Agency. In short, we have ended up where we expected to be. Put
another way, there appears to be no prospect for. establishing the type of
dialogue with Mr. Snod ests of both parties. |

e are j

in an adversary relationshi vith him,
although it is incumbent on us to continue to minimize, to the extent that
NL ———

SECRET


--- Page 61 ---
Mr. Mahon. Would you please provide the Committee staff with
————ae

some samples of these performance reports, sanitized ‘as you think

_ appropriate?

Mr. Bush. I would be willing to bring some down and discuss them with
a .
the Committee off the record, Mr. Chairman. But I am reluctant to do that,
and I am even more reluctant to provide the documents themselves or to have
their contents described to the Committee by anyone who is not intimately
familiar with espionage, counterintelligence and covert.action operations

and with the entire management system used by the Operations Directorate.

There are a number of reasons for my position. One serious concern

‘ revolves around. the effects on our internal processes of the sort of inquiry

fa

“you propose. One of the primary reasons that our internal management. system

is effective is that particd tion is ict] Limited to those immediately

concerned. Given that we are all human beings, there is no escaping the.
——

“fact that knowledge that the reports in question are being read, or may at

“some future time be read, by outsiders will lead to their being written | ~

_ will be’ to reduce the usefulness of the system.

with a view to their possible impact on an extended readership. There will

bea tendency for the managers in the field to slant their discussions of.

“problems and to exaggerate’ accomplishments; Inevitably, the net effect -
eee eed

_ Another difficulty involves security. To be useful for judging per-

TERN

formance, the reports must be very detailed. Thus they discuss * recruitments

————

in terms “of numbers, ‘the ‘specific: access 5 of agents to information, recruit-

Se —_—_—_—"——*sSskvwmnknhnkn ee ir
ment techniques, and so forth. By the time all this. sensitive material on
nn

. sources and methods is removed, any samples are going to consist primarily

of disconnected bits and pieces or of ‘unenlightening generalizations. :

And I have a third problem with this request. The reports. themselves
| eens) . . EEE
are but one part of a very complex and thorough process we use for internal

Management. It takes a detailed familiarity with the process to appreciate

its effectiveness. Thus, I feel strongly that someone from the Agency who
LO, :

' has that intimate knowledge should be present if and when you want to

consider the reports.


