
--- Page 1 ---
Toa 10074-10355) | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 if

ON ee ee
© owcassiriep =) eo SD CONFIDENTIAL. SCRE:

ROUTING. AND RECORD SHEET

MO px 9816 |

ore :
1 March- 1972

" COMMENTS (Number each commen? fo show from whe-
1 whom, Drow a line ocross column cfier each commen:

~CYSO Interzal Use Only ©

This information is not to b
disseminated outside CI/SO
without prior approval of
Chief, Special Operations
Group, cl Staff. .

Originated by: W. E. Gavaghe.
TYPED by = -FE/OPS”

Based on:
, Doc: |
Date:
Filed:

SOURCE: © 22 nr a
URE ma fadenotia-7 7
Field Station; f

ACTION: Me

a Soe,

ie 7 =

DISTRIBUTION: :
IX[EX NUNERICAL FILE (recorc

an
T/ Subject Fite gubrrorka- 7

a
Ti Other:

INDEXING: -
OE bes KP ype 7 date eeislaba

ee



--- Page 2 ---
QO

08687

ap .

ee re ee ee ee ete oe oe meme te

soos BX 9816:

1 March 1972
et clA
ETURN TO
pockground ae ony
~ Do Not Reproey

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

SUBJECT: Contact Report of Meetings with(MBTROIKA-7_ in
: _. New York City on 14 February and in Virginia on a

17-18 February 1972 . -

. 9%. 1, This memorandum covers recent meetings with
(MPYROIKA-7 in New York City and in the Northern Virginia
area. The meetings were héld under secure’ conditions and
there were no security incidents noted. ;

2. Operational: .

ud : s persistent efforts to locate
‘join a pro-Mao study group finally paid off.g?The manager
of the China Bookstore finally broke down under (M37's —
campaign and put her in touch with a local USCFA study
roup under the leadership of Mrs. Susan Warren, aka Frank.
M}7 has attended one session and, based on her initial
observation, provided the assessment of Mrs. Warren attached ot
hereto at the undersigned's request °¢M)7 believes she has ;
hit it off with Mrs. Warren because of her understanding :
of dialectics (thanks to Andy Ness's tutoring) and, consequently, |
she was instructed to attempt to develop a social-business E
relationship with herg2 With respect to the other members
of the study group,;(M7 claims that the situation, to date,
has not been conducive to ferreting out the identities of
these individuals, but. that she hopes that as the group :
continues to meet, some rapport will be established with her :
classmates. . . ee . :

. a . ~ g [
: b. New School and language instruction: GD7 i
has formally enrolled at the Graduate Faculty of the New . :
School for Social Research in a course entitied "Comparative i
Legal Systems," which studies the theories, institutions, 7
concepts, customs and which purports to analyze and compare

the law and the administration of law in selected countries,

included China, Japan, Vietnam, Germany, the U.S. and the

Soviet Union 2” (7 will also enroll in a French language

instruction course in the near future.



--- Page 3 ---
(2/pd

Ramparts' Tours - New York Media Workshop's
Womens' Tour: “Acting on a suggestion proposed by Mr. Faeon

. 25 June 1972 with

c.

Horn, CI7S0, the undersigned raised the subject of the Women's

Tour which is scheduled to visit London, Paris (where they

will meet the DRV peace delegation) and Rome from 27 May -
ad7 and instructed her to attempt to determine.

the interest in,”and likely composition of, the New York . -

group and explore the possibility of joining such a group ~ ie

and explore the possibility of joining such a group.2QD7's

' first reaction tothe tour was that the cost ($699, which ; ‘

price includes airfare, trains, hotels, etc.) was too high.
It was explained to her that the cost factor should not

deter her from following through. It was then that (M7
voiced some concern that the timing of the tour may2interfere

‘with her own PCS departure (we had been talking in terms of

mid-May or June 1972 up to this point). It was made clear
to her that no fixed date has been established as yet for
her PCS departure and that the aforementioned tour may well
prove to be.of operational interest, e.g. meeting the DRV
delegation and continuing the staging process prior to her
actual departure.”(M)7 said that she understood and would
look into the matter. She did not believe she would have |
any difficulty in covering for funds should she find herself
included on the tour. . os ;

co. : mo. :
copy of She SputhHast Asia Reports (SEAR): (M}7 produced © |
a copy of the first issue o R, a bi-weekly newsletter ‘
Committee, Box 59, Loeb Student Center,, 566. LaGuardia Place, b
N.Y.C. 100039¢{(M}7 is listed as one ofl£ive contributing g 5
staff members on the back page)of this mimeographed new
left publication. A copy of this first issue is attached
hereto. - One of(MS7's articles will appear in a subsequent
issue of SEAR. oz | . CS , .

22 e. JBMINIMUM Testing and Training: As part of
QD7's covert training and assessment in anticipation of her
foreign assignment, the undersigned arranged for two members
of the Psychological Assessment Branch, TSD (Messrs. DeMarco.
and Saunders) to administer a JBMINIMUM test to her and to .
brief her in the use and value of the JBMINIMUM test in a a
field situation. This training and briefing took place on 7 4
18 February in a safehouse in,N. Arlington, Va. (A copy
of the JBMINIMUM. assessment of(M)7 will be made a matter of
record in her official dossier) s2@97 was introduced as
“Miss Julie" to members of the PAB/TSD for purpose of this
test and briefing. (Mr. Andy Ness devoted the afternoon of —

18 February withOd7 for the purpose of continuing her training

ew : :

2

es a oe wee

=m.


--- Page 4 ---
in dialectics, which she has found to be particularly useful
in understanding the study group discussion and to ‘permit
her participation.)

2, Administrative:

: “0% a. Salary and 0 eratinal Advances. The undersigned
paid(M)7 her January salary on a $500 advance on 17 February
1972. She also received:'a $300 advance on 14 February. 1972.
These advances were necessary because of the expenses M) Gz

had incurred in enrolling at the New School and to pay for

her French lessons. (One of the reasons (i> 7 was brought down
to the Washington area was to straightén out a problem

she was having with her accounting. Hopefully, she is now
‘convinced that she had been receiving all that was due her.)

' o2b. ‘Tax Administration and Notification of Personnel
Action. M}7 was notified of the change in the tax assessment
. and of the adjustments in her salary due to the legislative

pay increase and the withholding of premiums for _ hospitaliza-
tion. . .

3a Actions to be taken. to_be taken.

ar: CD T's assignment abroad. er the undérsigned's

discussions with Messrs, Flitcroft ads Cernish) a stelepouch
dispatch willbe sent. FFG (Bangkok) Statio proposing (N}7's
assignment ‘tt @angkok) primarily for housekeeping purposes,
but with a regional mission to perform. (The undersigned
is presently working on this message. a .
: b. Concelament device. 67 requested a ‘conceal-

ment device for her microdot viewer which the undersigned will
attempt to obtain from TSD. Additionally, the undersigned
will request TSD to provide. concealment devices for (M}7's

" general use as a storage for papers and funds. . or

aan , Satian E. Gaver
- . oo oe, FE/OPS

Attachments
_AS stated

(08687

