
--- Page 1 ---
‘fioa-10073-10101

2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 im .

. OEE eect Te,

CLAREIMCATION
“SECRE tT

mE ee
*
° ANE
Station, JMWAVE ¥ = aor

f Swiss
* cesar TONAL/TYPIC/ AMFAUNA

‘
D REPS

. Aetion Required: For Your Information

1. Following are the results of the debriefing of AMFAUNA-14 in
the JUWAVE area from 22 November to 2 December 1963.

2. AMPAUNA-14 did not leave her apartment all day Sunday, 6& Oct.
Qa Honday, 7. October, she went to work as usual, When she arrived, she
found a letter waiting for her which had been forwarded to her office
from her accommodation address; it was in AMPAUNA-1's handwriting and
contained nothing of any interest, so she was sure there was a secret
writing message on it.

3, At 1255 hours two men arrived at the office, one about 45 years
old and short, who from his appearance might have been a bus driver,
and the other a very young dark-skinned man. They waikvd into the :
office vestihule and told the guard that they wanted to see AMFAUNA-14, |
fhe guard came into the office to give AMFAUNA-14 the message, and the
two men followed right behind. They told AMFAUNA-14 that she had to
come with them to identify an arrested person, AMFAUNA-14 said that
eho would have to ask her supervisor for permission to leave, because
it was not yet closing time. She turned to go back into the office,
and the two men followed her in, The supervisor told her that it
would be all right for her to go, but said that she should check-in by
phone if there were any difficulty, AMFAUNA*+14's father and uncle,
both of whom work in the same office, asked whether they could come
with her. The men said no, because she would be coming right back;
they said they were taking "her _to "G2" headquarters in La Vibora.

Distribution:
Orig & 2 ~ Chief, SAS

IN PEk-X

eS Copy ee
ceusedg. neon boi sec

iene 19-6-50/3

co tsssiacatlon Hg]



--- Page 2 ---
B : a er re ea wy gt oe foi. ii ; .
. 4. "“AMPAUNA-14 tried to dispose of the letter ahé had just re- -
‘ ceived from ANFAUNA-1 by leaving, it on the desk of a fellow employee
together with some potatoes and a carrot for cover, but the men would
‘not let her, She did, however, manage to destroy a page from her note-

book containing telephone numbers,

5. At the DSE headquarters in Villa Maristas, AMFAUNA-14 was
_ turned over to a militiawoman who had her strip and pertormed a body
*§ goaroh on her, She was fingerprinted and photographed and her biograph
data were taken down, after which she was locked in a cell which had
an adjoining private bath. Nothing else of importance happened for
the rest of the day.

6. During her four-day detention period, AMFAUNA-14 was, handled

the follow: DSE officers: IMC BiCiUy ‘ CET
by he oS Paarane ates Et) cs ii aE EE ays APONCYVYA, Conn

“Ay Qo BED pranciacoMABAD: AMFAUNA-14 believes that this ia hia —
aloneme, He no roduce himself, but she saw the name on her
release papers which he signed. He was born about 1918 and is about
5°4" tall, weighs about 160 pounds, and haz a fat build, aquiline nose,
greenish eyes, dark skin, grey-brown wavy hair, rough laborer‘'s hands,
and two teeth missing from the lower jaw. He smokes both cigars and
cigarettes, hia manner was soft and kindly, and AMFAUNA-14 believes
-he ie probably poorly educated. He is married, but AMFAUNA-14 did not
arn whether he has children or what his address is. He wears civilia
/plothes and drives a black 1956 Pontiac with a grey roof. Discussing ~
@ man later in the AMCOG household, AHFAUNA-14 was told by Pedro
TLL. (whois 8 brother_of Justo CARRILLO) that Pedro knows ABAD. —
ing to Pedro, ABAD is part Jewish and\an old Communist who worked
half of Fidel TRO during the Batista
pariod. Pedro CARRILLO thinks that ABAD may now have some regrets
about the course he has taken. .

e4

(b) "Carlos" aka "Samuel": AMFAUNA-14 does not know hie true
nawe, He was born about 1942 or perhaps a little earlier, He is
about 5'6" tall, weighs about 150 pounds, and has a muscular build, —
drooping eyelids, light olive skin, wavy chestnut hair with a widows —
peak. He is a nervous pacer, and walks with his head bent forward and
tilted slightly to one side, An expression which he frequently used
was "0.E." pronounced “OKAH" with the accent on the first syllable.

He told AMFAUNA-14 that he had been a student in the Commercial School
of Havana, that he had worked clandestinely under the Batista regime,
had been arrested by Col, Esteban VENTURA Novo, had been released due
to the influence of his father, and had gotten. out.of the country with
the aid of the Mexican Ambassador to Cuba, coming then to the United
States. He drives a 1959 black and white Chevrolet Corvair, wears

: Givilian clothes, and carries a pistol, sometimes a .45 and sometimes
a .38, AMFAUNA-14 believes him to be a 100% Communist. She thinks he

' may have been somewhat better trained than Francisco ABAD and may have
been somewhat superior in rank, although this was never clearly evident
There seemed to be a little professional jealousy between the two men.
IZ she told one man something which she had been unable to remember
for the other, the second would show signs of jealousy or resentment.
"Carlos" subsequently told AMPAUNA-14 to phone 61-4319 and ask for —
“Samuel” when she wanted to reach him. She phoned him at this number
bout ten times tn all. The phone was alwaye answered by the same
woman, except for. once when a boy answered and then called for his
mcther to come and take the phone, AHFAUNA-14 would ask for "Samuel"
aud the woman would invariably reply that he was not there. AMFAUNA-

“Dolores.” The woman would always reply "Yes, Comrade." Discussing
this person later within the AMCOG household, AMFAUNA-14 was told by
Tarael (oP Samuel ILES. FS*
: yugs

@®CARCANO Araujo,

WAVE traces on this
SEK C/T CHR ;

} Difax CoN MIC 7 FOR

Seay
ied
lak CONTINUED



--- Page 3 ---
: ° . .
wens ateueee : “4. oa avnewi Us Ua-12004

, . t ‘

name inolude HCSA-09806 of 23 April 1963 showing that one Maria CARCANO
-‘Arujo (born 7 December 1935) travelled to Chile in March and April 1963
on a diplomatic passport, An AMOT report of 27 September 1962 mentions
one Antonia CARCANO Araujo as a communist in charge of vigilance, and
living at 47 Artes St., Casablanca. There also appears to be a Maria
ARAUJO (born about 1908) who ig an old-time Communist living at Artes
47. AMFAUNA-1 has been given the names of several former residents of
this neighborhood in hopes of finding a relative of the CARCANO or
ARAUJO families whose physical description matches that of "Carlos,"
AMIPAUMA-1 has also interviewed Col, VENTURA in the WAVE aren, VENTURA
remenbers case similar to that of "Carlos" but doea not remomber the
boy's name, He says that he seems to remuaber that the boy's father
was connected with one Jose LOPEZ Villaboy (on whom WAVE haw numerous
tracea) and that he was assisted in getting to Mexico by a Hexican

diplomat named "Benjasin." @yricusa 26 £5 neewy Dee €/937
. : Te man appease st ar te &£ HEAMVAR FERS
(oc) Fnu lnu:; This man appeared a mes during AMFAUNA-
ié'a interrogation. She never heard his name at thie time, but later
saw him on televisiod interrogating ANSIGH-2 and he was identified
then aa Jose AntonioWFERNANDEZ Menert. She does. not believe that this
is his true name, becduse it is her understanding that DSE officers use
Qliases in their public appearances. He is about 5'11" tall, slender,
with darkigsh skin and black hair combed straight back. He has very
large greon cold eyes. He was born about 1930 and appears to be un-
educated, with a cynical and vulgar manner, He wears oe Biatand
: . . Kare 4.
7, At about 1600 or 1700 hours on Tuesday, 8 October, AMFAUNA-14
was brought into ABAD's office for her first interview, ABAD began
by asking if she knew why she was there, AMFAUNA-14 replied that she
hed no iden. ABAD observed that that was strange, because he had
. 6%
judged her to bo an able and intelligent womeas 7 6c 0A be ER- 3267 57
8, Honestly believing that ghe might have been denounced by the
jealous wife of her lover, Manue 1 FeCOMPANTON ,» AMFAUNA-14 suggested
that it might be &@ personal matter,
7 aby ath:

NEC NCB: C14
Card SON ECA ET Oi kwee ne 0. SOR Of
®. @aid that it\was not, He-then fitha her if she kneW ohs<94
Lais Braulio’ ILLAR Negret, AMFAUNA-14 said that she did not, ABAD
eaid that th was strange, because VILLAR Negret knew her, He asked
42 she w one Angel *BRINGAS, AMFAUNA~14 said that she did. ABAD
ophed why fame, Kooy BRWBOM ane 7ouls dony, iprine pis geunyp NEC
10. AMPAUNA-14 said that she knew the man as Luis *NEGR ‘and had
not recognised the name VILLAR Negret. , Gab hea ko
c BS ee TT ee
11. ABAD told ANFAUNA-14 that NEGRET was then under detenttor und~
had implicated AMPAUNA-14 in his confession, ABAD wanted to know wha
AGVADHA-14's connection with NEGRET had been, AMFAUNA-14 said that
NEGRET had been in her house once, and once in her mother's,

Qa ePales bea Se SLPS a) Pek STE LUO CER Le ete cite en

13. At this point ‘in the interrogation, ABAD was called away and
AMFAUHA-14 was returned to her cell. Two hours later the interrogation
vas rosuned, ; : &

23. ABAD picked up where he had left off, and asked AMFAUNA-14
what connection she had had with Angel BRINGAS. AMFAUNA-14- said that
ske had known BRINGAS no better than she had known NEGRET. ABAD said
that she was lying and urged that she cooperate. AMFAUNA-14 promised
that she would cooperate. ABAD said that NEGRET had told the DSE that
AMVAUHA-14 had had sexual relations with BRINGAS, and AMFAUNA-14 denied
the allegation,

14,.-The interrogation wae again interrupted, and AMPAUNA-14 was
ret to her cali, When she returned to the interrogation room,
ahe f#aw that ABAD had an envelope containing what she recognized to be
papers taken from her apartment, including airline passenger manifests,
ciphering material, instructions for using the deciphering material, so ,
aod insurance policies and personal papers belonging to AMFAUNA-1. :
AWHAUNA-14 now realized that it was.time for her to pretend to ~
CLABGIFICATION PAGE NO.
S%s" SSa Use paevious e0iTION, SEC £ 7 [x] : » 3

Das Ba SNe Aa AR SE ee SEP A


--- Page 4 ---
14-09000_. ———____.
6 @ with the pdm, as’ AMFAUNA-1 had briefed her to do in such a
: ‘eituation,

«

: 15. - ABAD began by telling her that she was in a very serious 3
situation, because he knew that she had had very close connections
with a KUBARK agent. ABAD asked whether AMFAUNA-1 was identical with

_ "Julio." AMPAUNA-14 said that AMFAUNA-1 had been known as "Julio,"
4BAD then wanted to know whether NEGRET had been working with "Julio,"
AMPAUNA-14 denied this, ABAD asked whether NEGRET had known "Julio."
AMPAUNA-14 denied this too, but volunteered the information that "Julio"
had provided NEGRET with mail facilities, and that AMFAUNA-14 had been
the cutout between them, Did NBGRET know uf "Julio's" existfnce, ABAD
wanted to know. AMFAUNA-14 said that herda2d not , that she had brought .
HBGRET mail and money which she had gotten from "Julio," and had picked
wail up from him and delivered it to “Sulto," but that NEGRET had .
never known "Julio's" identity.

16, The truth about AMFAUNA-14's relations with NEGRET and BRINGAS
according to her statements to her KUBARK case officer in November 1963
in the JMWAVE area, is as follows:

, (a) In about mid-1962, AMCOG-2 nsked AMFAUNA-14 to serve as:
outout’ ‘between herself and an unident 4 fied agent, and AMFAUNA-14
agreed. AMFAUNA-14 was driven to the meeting site, which was on the
@idewalk in front of a textile factory near Calle 100 in Marianao, by
2's chauffeur, a Spaniard named "Segundo," This agent introduced |.

himself to AMFAI AUNA~ 14 only as-"Bl *NEGRO", and * AMPAUNA-14 described .
fRerseif to him as an employee of an unidentified embassy. For contact .

_ purposes, ‘“R1 Negro" gave her the telephone number 29-4800 or 40-4900,

y (b) Later, w when AMFAUNA-14 began to trust "El Negro" more,

) ehe gave hin the telephone number of her mother, She learned that

“MRT Kagrotfa" true name waa taria Rranlio VILLAR Negret, and that he

- ‘Lived in a amall room in the rear of the textile factory, The telephon
‘fumber which he had given her was always answered by a woman whose
Geme she learned to be “Waximina,"

(c) VILLAR Negret was born about 1928, and was about B11"

tall with broad shoulders and.a strong build. He had black wavy hair.
brewn eycs, an olive skin, and a face marked by acne. AMFAUNA-14 —

. Bever learned anything about his family directly from him, but DSE
officers told her that he was married with one child,
parents lived on a farm in Pinar del Rio Province.

: (4d) VILLAR Negret was a member o ucionaria |.
‘Denocratica, which AMFAUNA-14 understands to be a successor organizatiog'
to the AAA of Aureliano SANCHEZ Arango, He had formerly belonged to _ |}
en action component of this organization, but more recently had de- -

voted himsel? to intelligence collection. AMFAUNA-14 brought bh eh st |

Y ructions and money from ANCOG-2, and picked up his intelligenc ied
'/veporte which she delivered to AuoG-2. She underst that ‘AUCOG-2.

y at these reports via diplomatic channels to Fr AEZ ink 1 ELE

9. 45 bj M2. 92 livered them to. an individual identified only as<TE
x Nez," The last contact which AMFAUNA-14 had had wYth

Ph id be said concerned
‘ io ‘Coloubia,

a (e) Once when "f feg
meet with AMPAUKA, 14. This cousin was Ange14¢BRING.
n an d ale
0. On various other subsequent occasions, BRINGAS Filled in ;
Negro." AE. INKC- CN 9209. PROVIDE GY 20/~KILF

(£) According to what the DSE officers told her, "El Negro"
was arrested about 1 October and was to be shot. AMFAUNA-14 asked her
DSE interrogators whether it would not be possible to reindoctrinate
“Bl Negro" instead of shoot him, but they told her that it was not
worth the trouble because "El Negro" was raon of low morals who.

CLASSIFICATION 7 PAGE NO.
x] CONTINUED

for

. ta, Me eK paavious epivion. BECRET



--- Page 5 ---
‘

be shown to Angel BRINGAS when and if ue As Caugnt,

(g) On 12 or 13 October 1963, after AMFAUNA-14 had been re- -
leased, she was telephoned at her Place of employment by Angel BRINGAS .
who told her guardedly that "51 Negro" had been arrested and said that
he would like to send a female cousin of his to talk to AMFAUNA-14. A
meeting was arranged in the home of ANFAUHA-14'a mother, The female
cousin, whose name was "Gladys", told AMFAUNA-14 that BRINGAS had gone
into hiding and wondered whether "the family with which she worked" |
(the AMCOGS) could help him get into asylum. AMFAUNA-14 said that she
doubted this. "Gladys" told AMFAUNA-14 that, in case it were possible
to do anything for BRINGAS, she should tclephone "Gladys" with an.
ipnocent message. It was understood that @ meeting would take place at
1900 hours on the same day of the telephune call at the Ten Cent Store
S3rd between 10th and 12th in Vedado. AH#AUNA-14 does not remember:
Gladys telephone number which was left with her mother.

(bh) In spite of what AMFAUNA-14 told the D8E, AMFAUNA~1 had:
had nothing to do with NEGRET. AMFAUNA-14 had told this story to pro-
tect ANCOG-2, NEGRET had known that AMCOG-2 was involved, and had once
had a meeting with her in her home. Nevertheless, AMFAUNA-14 briefed
ANCOG-2 on the cover story which she had told the DSE and told her that,
din case she were ever arrested and questioned, she should admit having
talked to KEGRET in her home, but deny having been involved in the
communicationa channel or knowing anything about it.

Station Comment: Luis Braulio VILLAR Negret appears to be ...
identical With Luis *REURE Villar (born 4 November 1930 in Consolacion
del Sur, Pinar del Rio), who is carded as ACSI source No, 492 and
appears in AMBUD correspondence as National Coordinator of the Accion
Revolucionaria Democratica, "El Guajiro Bermudez" appears to be iden-
tical with Gerardo Jose *QUESADA Vasquez (201-292022) (born 9 May 1919,
Pinar del Rio), President and founder of Accion Revolucionaria Democrati

>| sna S082 scurce Me, (28, Thser arc na Station traces on Angel BRINGAS. | |
Woh ‘Fhe 1968 Havana telephone dyrectory has no listing ftew'20-4990, c~0n
A Asv._d9 #4)17, Marianso,’ JMWA

Mv-aVUU 19 Listed to Karaes PELABALUL ;
has no traces on him. There‘ds no listing under 70-5570, However,

under 70-5579 there is the Cuban Ra X y Foto, S.A., Calle 23°:
#72, La Rampa.) RAAT Le he Ieikc." eure te z

. 5 ~ QIRCPS. -

17, ABAD appeared to be particularly interested in how NEGRET and

"Julio" obtained their funds, and kept returning to this subject during
the interrogation, ; ;

16, ABAD then addressed himself to the contents of the envelope
and a guitcase found in AMFAUNA-14's apartment, He commented that all
these things appeared to belong to AMFAUNA-1 and his son, and asked how
they happened to be there, AMFAUNA-14 replied that ANFAUNA-1 and his”
eon, together with AMFAUNA-3, had been hiding for a few days in her
apartment because their usual hiding place had become unavailable.

19. ABAD wanted to know how and when AMFAUNA-14 had first tet
AMPAUHA-1. ANFAUNA-14 replied that she had met AMFAUNA-1 in about.
February 19623, that AMFAUNA-1 had regularly parked hie car in a lot near
her office and that they had seen each other on the street frequently,
that ANFAUNA-1 hed finally spoken to her, and that a friendship had:-:
developed which finally turned into a love affair. (Comment: This was
a lie told to conceal the fact that it had been AMCUTLER-@ who had in--
troduced thes.) She said that AMFAUNA-1 had been her lover until about.
July 1963 when she broke up with him because he was too busy with
clandestine work to pay the proper amount of attention to her,

30. ABAD asked what part AMFAUNA-14 had played in AMFAUNA-1's .
clandestine activities, AMFAUNA-14 replied that AMFAUNA-1..would some-
. tises telephone her late at night to invite her to go out for a ride,

and she would then find that AMFAUNA-1 was going out to have agent
seetings and wanted her along for cover, ABAD asked whom AMFAUNA-1 had
been meeting. AMFAUNA-14 mentioned a person known as "Gustavo" and

88a ss Pravious eDiTiON,



--- Page 6 ---
emotes we

 BECRET | ‘+

ws vag
+ UFGA-12804:-. |
gave the physical description
out of Cuba. (She never knew AMFAUNA-24's true name.) She also mentioned
Manolo *VILLAMANAN, the true name of AMFAUNA-13 (whom she: had. known
Only as AMFAUNA-1's buciness partner but when she thought she ‘could -
safoly mention now that he was out of Cuba.) For good measure she added
@ notional name and physical description. : . : \

21. Referring back to AMFAUNA-1'e automobile, ABAD asked what
kind of a car he had driven, AMFAUNA-14 replied that it was a gray
Chevrolet Impala. She repeated that ANFAUNA-1 had formerly parked it
near her office, but said that she had not ssen it recently. ABAD
apked where AMFAUNA-1's red car was, and she said she did not know, He
asked what the license number on this car was, and.she said she did not
now. He never asked anything about the third car which AMFAUNA-1 had .

obtained. ;
92. ABAD commented that the DSE had observed AMFAUNA-1 in his

gutomobile in the Havana dock area on 1 January 1963, having a meeting
with apother person. (AMFAUNA-14 recalls that this other person was

after an attempt to pick up AMFAUNA-1's radio.

33. With reference to the KUBARK agent known as "Julio", whom
they had recently identified with AMFAUNA-1, ABAD said that he knew
that "Julio" had left Cuba in October 1962 and believed that he had
gone to RBurope, but he said he did not know whether "Julio" had gone

Clandestinely or legally. :

234. AMFAUNA~14 wae asked about AMFAUNA~1's subsources in other

provinces, but she said she knew nothing about them. ABAD said he was
eure that ANPAUNA-1 had a good anuree on tha Tala of Pinas. Whorne war
name might be "Raul". ABAD also mentioned the name of a person who had
been shot about two weeks previously and who he believed had been work-
dng with AMFAUNA-1. (AMFAUNA-14 does not remember the name of this

percon. )

25. ABAD asked if AMFAUNA-1's son had helped him in this clandes-.
tive work. AMPAUNA-14. replied that the son had been with AMFAUNA-1 .
freqvontly, but that she thought it was only because he was’helping —.
AMPAUNA-1 with hie buainess and that the son probably had had nothing
to do with clandestine work. wee ; :

apartsent, and said he could see she was not cooperating with him, She

was not volunteering information, he said, but waiting to be asked
questions, ABAD said he was sure that there was much that AMFAUNA-14
could tell him spontaneously, and he intimated that there might be a-
chance for her to rehabilitate herself.

weplied that they had been left in her apartment by AMFAUNA-1, who .
dutended to instruct her later by SW what to do with them, She said
that ANFAUNA~1 had trained her in this system, and had left her his.
materials, so that he could use her as a stop-gap communications, 3ink

while he was trying to reorganize hie net. crvigw
Aa i ed od a <€

28. ABAD told her that this was plainly ni ue, cause some 0
the lists were dated later than AMFAUNA-1's departure date. He said he
they hed been brought to AMFAUNA-14's apartment by; AMCUTLER-2,
who had been observed coming there on 5 October with Lolipf*CORREOSO.
(fais was true, according to AMFAUNA-14. AMCUTLER-2 and lin CORREOSO
had brought the pasgenger manifests to AMFAUNA-14's house at about 1630
or 1700 hours on & October, and had stayed about fifteen minutes, AT

the first in two weeks, initiated by AMFAUNA-39 by means of a telephone
call to AMFAUNA-1's mother. who was serving as cutout between them. .
AMPAUNA-38 had called the meeting to ask whether she had received any
instructions from AMFAUNA-1 as to how to,act in case of an iaternal
uprising, which a number of people in Cuba seemed to be expecting about

Of AMFAUNA-24, whom ghe knew to be safely’ -

AMPAUNA-24, and that he and AMFUANA-1 had rendezvoused in the dock area ~

26. ABAD again turned to the envelope of papers found in AMFAUNA~14 a0

27. ABAD asked her where the pasgenger lista came from. AMPAUNA- 14

1400 hours that samc day, AMFAUNA-14 had had a meeting with AMFAUNA-39, .

saelaginanncaunaes ca heoeede2 i, wa asens Soe nner



--- Page 7 ---
(The DSE interrogators never ¢ at any’ “bias ‘sent ionea AMFAUNA-39, ©

her about this enrlier meetifg, so ANFAUNA-14 concludes that aor yaad,
been under intensive surveillance that day; either AMCUTLER-2 had been .
‘under surveillance on 5 October, or she herself had been under some. kind

of periodic spot check, )

830. ABAD asked AMFAUNA-14 how she had become acquadated with
ARCUTLER-3, and AHFAUNA-14 repjied that she had met AMCUTLER-2 through
AMPAUNA-15, the wife of a cousin of AMFAUNA~14 Who is a prisoner on the
Iele of Pines,

‘90. ABAD then asked AMFAUNA~14 where her SW materiales were, which.
surprised AMFAUNA-14 because she had thought they had been found during
her house gearch and were part of the incriminating envelope which ABAD
was holding. AHNFAUNA-14 told ABAD where to look for the materials, and
he gent somebody to get then,

92, ABAD wanted to know how AMFAUNA-i and AMFAUNA-3 had gotten out
of Cuba. AMFAUNA-14 said she did not know, She said she understood they
were to get their instruction on the street once they had left her apart-

ment.
33. ABAD abruptly asked AMFAUNA~ 14 wh whether she knew anybody in

‘uyano, AMFAUNA-14 said she did not, hen produced a- photograph
of ANPAUNS-14 together with AMFAUNA-1 and bare 29|and told her that she :
had boon in 2's home in Luyano with AMFAUNA-1 on Saturday, 7 Septe: bs

He asked AMFAUNA-14!whetherlAM@EE32 were employed in an embassy, AMFAUN.
14 said whe did not know but that she thought so. She said she knew

to be a personal friend of AMFAUNA-1, and thought that he might
occasionally have helped AMFAUNA-1 with his mail. (It was true that
MIPAUHA-14 had gone to ‘a house on 7 September with AMPAUNA-1.
Later the sane Gay_ AMFAUNA-15 took her to Miramar to introduce her to
SePe0ns 27. cause the DOD Lcwcr capyessed au; dulescol la AMTAUNA-32,
AWFAUHA-14 concluded that they had not observed this meeting, and that.
/ therezore it had been AMWEE}4 who had been under surveillance on 7
Geptember and not herself or 'ANFAUNA~1. She also concluded that the DSE.
had been inefficient in not transferring their surveillance to herself:

and ANPAUNA-1, )

' * 38. ABAD again obhanged the subject suddenly, “Where is the radio?’ .
ho asked. "Could AMWEE-@ have it?" AMFAUNA-14 said she did not know...
anything about a radio. ~ "Where is the camera?" asked ABAD. AMPAUNA-14 -
admitted having seen AMFAUNA-1 with a Minox camera, but said she did not
krow what AMIFAUNA-1 had done with it, She said she had hoped that
AMPAUHA~1 would leave it with her, and pretended to be hurt that he had
pot done so. ABAD asked her whether she had ever seen one like it in
‘the A8C0G house, and ANFAUNA-14 said that she had. Throughout the
interrogation, ABAD kept reverting to the subject of the camera: and the

Bhe replied that her grandmother was the cousin of AMCOG-3'1
‘mother. ABAD said that the whole family had been under observation
.@ long time, and mentioned: an organization (name not remembered b
“RIPAUHA-14) which ANCOG-2 had worked with during the Batista era,
he wanted to know, was ANCOG-3 doing. AMFAUNA-14 said that she d
think he was doing anything clandestine. ABAD replied that the DSE
positive that AKCOG-3 was doing secret work. AMFAUNA-14 said tha
a should not delude itself, that the entire family was too self:
engage in anything of the kind.

36. ABAD. asked what the. diplomatic visitors to the AMCOG household
telt about. AMFAUNA-14 said that they never talk One al ABAD asked *|
about the attitude of"the Doctor" (AMCOG-3's uncle), and AMFAUNA-14 said :
that he was waiting for the situation to settle, at

"what about “aur AUHA-37" asked ABAD. "Did she tork |
aid that she did not, but: that she so
ABAD wanted to know whether AMFAUNA-3 Air
Fioriéa. AMFAUNA- 24 ‘answered that PAUN: 3

. 36.

AMVAUNA-17" AMPAUNA-14
gave his information.
i_ work: with some one’



--- Page 8 ---
* UFGA-12804

had been involved somehow with her sister who Jives in Florida, ABAD
asked whether AMFAUNA-14 had been a good friend of AMFAUNA-3, and she
@aid that she had been, ABAD asked whether AMFAUNA-14 had ever heard
AHMPAUNA-3 speak about the Escambray insurgents, AMFAUNA-14 said that
she had not. ABAD asked whether ANFAUNA~3 had had contacts with any
embassy people, for example the Spanish Embavsy. AMFAUNA~-14 said that
she did not know of any such contacts. .

37. "How abcut ANCUTLER-2?" askec ABAD, "Wo know that she spends
(& lot of time there," AMFPAUNA-14 said she did rot know, ’

88. ABAD asked AMFAUNA-14 if she were # revolutionary, AMFAUNA-14
eaid that she was not, but that neither was the against the revolution.
She said that she had joined the militia early in the revolution, but
had soop dropped out because there were some things about the revolution
which she did not understand. For instance, she could not underetand
why thore should be so many shortages and rationing, whereas before the
revolution there had been plenty. ABAD exp)sined that the shortages wer
the result of the imperialist blockade of Cvba. AMFAUNA-14 seid that
she could underatand this, but that it did mot explain why there should |
be a shortage of coffee when Cuba grew its own, ABAD said that coffee
was in short supply because Cuba was sending coffee to the Soviet Union
in gratitude for Soviet assistance in overcoming shortages caused by the
imperialist blockade. §AHFAUNA-14 replied that this was very logical
now that it had been explained to her, and said she wondered why the
revolutionary government did not publicly say so in order to put an end
to public grumbling on the subject. 4

38, .Barly in the morning of 9 October, ABAD produced the letter ™
which AMPAUNA-14 received from AMFAUNA-1 on 7 October and held up the
letter to the light, examining it carefully for traces of SW. AMFAUNA-
UAto developer pilile wore brought and che wae tald ta davealan the latta
which ehe did in the presence of ABAD, "Carlos, "anda third man whom
ashe Was unable to get a good look at. All were very surprised and
disappointed when nd secret writing appeared. They kept asking her if
she were sure she was doing it right, and began intimating that she was”
deceiving them, (Station Comment: It is indeed surprising that no
secret writing appeared, because this letter was almost” undoubtedly the.
one containing SW message no, 1 to AMFAUNA-14,)

40. AMFAUNA-14 also explained the use of her carbons, The only
accommodation address ehe gave away was AMFAYNA-1l's JMWAVE area post
office box. She deliberately protected the (Rosa JUSTIZ Address. (the
home of ANMPAN~2), not knowing whether this waa a real or a fictitious
person, GA oY

41. "Carlos" and ABAD now invited AMFAUNA-14 to work with them, She
yeplied that she might be willing to do a0, but first wanted to know
what work would be expected of her, For instance, she said, she would
not inform on people in her office, They told her that this would not
be askedof her, because that sort of work is done by the Defense
Committees. Her work, they said, would be much more important, namely
maintaining a link between themselves and KUBARK. She said that would
be all right, but she was afraid that it would not last long because
KUBARK would probably put her on ice as soon as they learned that she
had been arrested, They told her not to worry about that,

42. -"Carlos" and ABAD suggested to her that AMFAUNA-1 had briefed
her to agree to cooperate with them, She denied this, claiming that she
had not really wanted to work with AMFAUNA~1 at all, but had- merely let
herself be imposed on for old times sake, They asked whether they
could trust her, She said she thought so, and asked whether she could
trust them to ksep their promises, They assured her that she could,
and said whe would be released the following day. : .

43. In the morning of 10 October, atter. being. tod that she was to
be released, AMPAUNA-14 was moved to a smaller cell without a bath. She:
sent for ABAD and complained “that he-had double~crossed her. He told



--- Page 9 ---
14-00000

UFGA-12894

Biewnsanne

her that he was going to keep his word and release her, but that her
original cell was needed for some new prisoners who were expected. He
said that the DSEZ had received advance word that a boatload of refugees

were going to try to leave Cuba that night. Many of them were women,
ton one of there was pregnant, so he wanted the larger cell with bath
or then,

44. ABAD plways trented AMFAUNA-14 kindly and considerately,
When she had 8s headache, he ordered aspirin fer her, Hévsaw to it that
she received soft drinks when she wanted them, and he seemed to be-
honestly distressed whenever she wert. AKIAUNA-14 believes that it had
been the DSE's intention from the very beginning to recruit her, be-
eause she doubts that all DSE prisoners are treated as well.

48. The firet SW message which AMFAUNA-14 wrote while under DSE
control was dated 10 October, the day of her release. The DSE officers
asked her what her control signal. was, and she replied that it was a
rubrio, but also included her true control signal. She deliberately
numbered her first controlled SW message no, 2, to conceal the fact
that she had already written several messages containing intelligence
reports. —

46. In all she wrote three SW messages. under control, She was :
obliged to write each one in duplicate, one ‘of which was mailed and the
other given to the DSE for study.. One day "Carlos" came to her very
.-{ angrily, said he doubted that her carbons were anything more than
S| _ ordinary paper because he had been unable to develop anything | that she |

t ww and @hmnntadnd bane wed th em mn aesmmavrar a
hag srittcn, and threatoasda her with roarrcst. AMPAUNA-14 told hin

V i that she did not know anything about it, but that if by chance he had

_ |. triea to deveiop the letters she had written with the pills he had
*taken-from her, it would not work, This surprised "Carlos," and
-AMFAUNA-14 explained that there were two different SW systems, one for
outgoing mail and the other for incoming. "Carlos" then asked her if .
’ there were. any significance to the size of envelope used, or to the way:
‘the letter paper was folded, AMFAUNA-14 said she did not think so.
AMFAUNA-14 feels that "Carlos" and ABAD never completely believed that
. he bad an SW system, because none of the letters which she received
disclosed 8¥ when developed, and none of the letters which she wrote
showed any traces of 8W when held up to glancing light.

s 47, "Carlos" was the DSE officer who maintained contact with
AWPAUNA-14 after her release. For two or three weeks he saw her every
- day at her spartment, sometimes for only twenty minutes, and sometimes
ataying for several hours, frequently late at night. Occasionally he
called her at her office. Finally AMFAUNA-14 told him that she had to
get up early in the morning to go to work, and asked him to visit her
‘early in the evening, which he agreed to do. At.the time of the in-

' tercepted AMGLOSSY landing in Pinar del Rio, "Carlos" did not visit
“AMPAUNA-14 for five days. When he finally returned, he was dirty,
aweaty and tired. He dictated an SW letter he wanted AMFAUNA-14 to
-gend to KUBARK, and while she was writing it he feil asleep.

- "@8, AMFAUNA-14 had to prepare written reports for him, which she
:“pigned. with the pseudonym "Dolores," He told her never to call him at
‘ DOB headquarters, because he was never there. Once he brought her a
book on Marxism to read, and promised to take her someday to visit a
collective farm in Pinar del Rio Province,

49. Despite his occasional efforts to get her to pick up the thread
of the AMFAUNA net, AMFAUNA-14 believes that the primary target she was
. intended to work against. was the AMCOG household, From remarks made by
both ABAD and "Carlos", she deduced that they already had an informer
-in the house, but that they were not satisfied with his production,

- Toward the end of her period of DSE -controlled activi jen felt that
| the DSB was becoming relatively less interested in AM
“net, and more in the AMCOG household.

_ 80, They asked her about one Vicente LAGO, who 8 a.
: at: the AMCOG house and who ‘Seems to be particularly intere:



--- Page 10 ---
They also wanted to know what diplomg ey
mentioned the. ‘ons (Toma JUESADA), they exclaimed and said
thay were very intereste n him, and asked whether she could arrange
invitations to tiie hougze. Other diplomatic personne} AMFAUNA-14 m
tioned ae visitors to the AHC hoy ¥ 1 I ¢

)

), Brasilian agdor.Lais
secretary of the United Arab Republig Em
Japanese Ambasmador, Fortunately, during the
MIFAURA-14's release from DSE custody, no ‘diplomats visited the AMCOG

* Cok Fee Qld Re pestKa H 201-994 71 3 oeran bald
81, With the knowledge and encouragement of the DSH, AWFAUNA-14
vigited the ANCOG house nearly every day. Her first visit took place
at noon on 1] October and she stayed until about 1800 hours, during
which time she told AMCOG-3 the entire story. He listened and took a
few notes, but kept most of the story in his memory, He encouraged
and calmed AMPAUNA~14, told her to follow DSE instructions to the letter
and assured her that KUBARK would send her instructions.

pasts AMFAUNA-14's immediate preoccupations were AMCUTLER-2 and
AMPA

(whom she knew to be blown to the DSE as KUBARK agents), .

-39 (who was not yet identified but had her telephone number and
might oali her at any moment with damaging results to himself), and ~
the possible arrival of 8W»ymessages from KUBARK naming other agent
* personnel, ° ‘

53. On 11 October, the day after her release, AMFAUNA-14 sent a

a Steers AR | = Bere avy: ae ~— =a
mommaye iv ANCUTLER-S via ARTAUNA-19 and the acthor of Mancle VIELAMANAS

warning her that she had been arrested. She also asked ANCOG-2 to send |

a warning to WEE2, ---%, Nat Cp boat wy ter WH TOM ee
9 7 oie S2IGY dame Herr dpod bo Ose |
84. On 13 or 14 f ;

MeuiCOG-2 went to @ home o bert im

O'PARRILL where she met Wanda HINI whom she asked merely to warn
oA 2 that the DSE had AMWRE}2‘*identified..,)Tyo or three days later, -

Wanda’ FOSCHINI reported backyjto AHCOG-2 that uu 2 evidently was not
taking the warning seriously. By thie time, however, AHFAUNA-14 was: :
sure that ANWR knew that something was wrong, because he had tele- 4

ened AMFPAUHA-I's mother asking for "Soledad ind‘ had been told that 4 but
ledad" was unknown, (Regarding Albertina 'FARRILL'S knowledge of;

these developments, AMFAUNA-14 believes that she probably knew nothing.
arres

pore than that AMPAUNA-14 had been_ jon released. ) A-qulg | ©
; \ ” : A sot-sserrh |
65, On ober AMFAUNA-14 sent a warning telephone ca t

AMPAUHA-39, She dialled 20-6102) end told the woman who anewered "Please
~€@4l Hanolo that Soledad calledgtand that he should not telephone me
beeause I am going to be out of Havana and will call him when I return, '
_, AMPAUHA-14 19 not sure now whether AMCOG-3, whom she consulted on the
“pest way. to a thig, had noted the telephone number,

£4. Crahya CO sa 0 stun tar| 2007 $5867 S~
ob se. RS om ARPAT toon warning was her lever
(enue ANIONY) whose warn i (ales ‘anc D ira.yP Unbeknowns 5

30-3, she sent & message to(COMPANTONI) via -AHCOG-3'g ehwuffeur
telling him to stay sway from hérpbhut asking him to-telephone. her
occasionally, ~ : .

TOR er ort eee a
57. On 30 Ostober when she arrived home from wor FAUNA to

found "Carlos" waiting downstairs for her, Trying to divert his atten-
tion from the mail box, she invited him to come right in, but he asked .
her why she did not open her mail box first, She did so and found two
letters from ANFAUNA-1, dated 19 and 25 September, They both contained
veiled references to names like "Carmina" (. 2), "Bdgardo,"
(AMPAUWA~37), Bl Grande" (AMPAUNA-25), andg\'Igor™ (Airey) 9 | ‘One of
them instructed AMFAUNA-14 to have, “Carmina” introduce her to "Edgardo"
and the other intimated that (ieor")nad something for her.

. 58. "Carlos" ordered her to develop these letters, and she did so,
Wo secret writing appeared, which did not surprise AMFAUNA-14 because
the letters themselves contained instructions for her, but it did



--- Page 11 ---
mpeme ER NA

Surprise "Carlos" who again began to accuse AMFAUNA-14 of double-
crossing him. AMFAUNA-14 explained the absence of SW by saying that
KUBARK was probnbly testing its communications channels and waiting
for things to quiet down before sending messages, 6
RE) 2

59. "Carios" then told AMFAUNA-)4 to get in touch with An
: BM t the package which he was holeing: for her, She telephoned
o 2 from her office and said she wanted to see him, v| E42 agreed
to a meeting, but stipulated that it be after 1700 hours and in his
office, AMFAUNA- 14 reported this conversation to "Carlos" who told.
her to ‘proceed with the meeting.

i)
2) 60. AMGEH)- 2 took AMFAUNA-14 into a emaii room, “where she quickly
plained the situation (she felt she should not spend much time in
2's office becauge she was afraid the DSE had her under surveil-
ance} this was confirmed laterdiwhen "Carlos" asked her casually how

: much time she had spent in 2's office, apparently trying to
eaten her out in a lie). 2 seemed surprised, and worried, and
_told her to take care of herself: { She told AMWE % that the reason

the DSEZ had wanted her to meet with him was ate pick up a package which
they believed he was holding for her.o AMEE) 2 replied that he was no
‘longer in a position to receive or send packages, because the diplomat
with whom he had been cooperating had been declared persona non grata,

61. "Carios" alao told AMFAUNA=14 ‘to contact AMCUTLER-2 to qrrange
introduction to "Edgardo,"’ AMFAUNA-14 telephoned AMCUTLER-2

umber , expecting to be told that AMCUTLER-2 was not there, and was :
very surprised when AMCUTLER-2 herself came to the telephone. AMFAUNA-
14 told AMCUTLER-2 that she wanted to see her, but AMCUTLER-2. said she
had. aa bad case of asthma and could not see anybody; AMFAUNA-14 re-

ed this convergation to "Carlos. "

lee a8, _scbeirite deol
dean 48¢ or +

“duet ep a2 had eithor wat wanandeand av |
FP nove Sescocaves C2 .

» explicitly advising her to hide or take asylum.
‘
_. 68. "Carlos" continued .to press AMFAUNA-14 to see AMCUTLER-2, and
- AXCUTLER-2 showed no signs of heeding AMFAUNA-14's warnings. AMFAUNA~1
. G, herefore sent one more message, this time a written one, via Lolita
(FORMOSO paying thet she really must see AMCUTLER-2 in the latter's
. fof the purpose of coordinating cover etories, AMCUTLER-2 then ~
| . paid a visit to the home of Lolita nuoge to pass the message that she
fe agreed to the meeting,

64, On 3 November, with the knowledge of "Carlos," AMFAUNA-14 went

_ to: dmcortsn-3 "= house. "Carlos" briefed her to obtain an introduction
“to. "Rdgardo", to find out where AMCUTLER-2's coffee shops wereylocated,
and to find out whether ANCUTLER-1 was a a close friend of Eloy AGUTIERRE
62° Ache,

be : 7a,

: » 68... ANCUTLER-2 told AMFAUNA~14 to tell
“got @ close friend of GUTIERREZ Wenoyo, She said to add that
angry with ANCUTLER-1 and thinking of divorcing him.

: 6. AMVAUNA-14 and ANCUTLER-2 devised the following cover 6 OFI6
for the protection of the source of the airline passenger manifests
CANFAUNA-18, whom AMFAUNA-14 does not know) and of "Edgardo" CAMFAUNA- |

a7, ‘whoa AMVAUNA-14 does not know):

: (a) Before leaving Cuba, AMFAUNA-1 had asked AMCUTLER-2 to

- leok out for his mother, and to pass on to AMFAUNA-14 anything that .
|. might come addressed to "Betty." One day, 8 colored woman called at

_ AMCUTLER-3' 8 coffee shop on Calle San Rafael with a package addressed
“to "Betty". The coffee shop employees had thought that the package was
intende: lor an. employee whose name is "Ketti" and had given it to her,
, _Said ag hot hers, and there matters rested until one day
when ANCUTLER= sited the coffee shop and was told about the incident.
eaployees that she. knew who the package was



--- Page 12 ---
oe .. “

ae 8 4 moe .

(b) AMCUTLER-2 had received a-.letter from AMFAUNA~1 dated 18
October saying that she would receive a visit from a person known to her
“who would introduce himself as "Edgardo", and asking her to introduce

~ "Edgardo" to AMFAUNA-14, This person has not yet arrived, and: AMCUTLER-|
3 does not know who he is. .

{
a | .’ 87, AMCUTLER-2 agreed to stick to these stories in case she is
interrogated, and to brief "Ketti" to support the coffee shop story.
| She also told AMFAUNA-14 she had decided to go into hiding immediately,
AMFAUNA-14 asked her not to do it so soon after her visit, but AMCUTLER-
{ 2 said that AMFAUNA-14 should provids her with cover by telling the DSE
1 that. AMCUTLER-2 had spoken of taking a holiday at Varadero,

68, Making her report to "Carlos" after this meeting, AMFAUNA-14
teld these cover stories as though they had just been revealed to her .
by ABCUTLEH-2,

. 69. 4 fourth letter arrived from AMFAINA-1, consisting of two
pages of overt text. AMFAUNA-14 was sure that it contained SW because
of the banalities in the cover letter. Before turning it over to
"Carlos" she took it to AMCOG-3 who had sumebody make a literal copy
-of it and then destroyed the original. AmFAUNA-14 turned the copy over
to "Carlos" who had her develop it, and was again disappointed and angry
when no SW showed up. (Station comment: this letter had contained SW
number groups for OWL reception.)

¢ i 70, On or about 10 November 1963, AMFAUNA-14 prepured a written

' yeport for the DSE on the visitors to the AMCOG household. This report
HI ‘was actually dictated by AMCOG-3 to AMFAUNA-14 who took it down on the
: _ typewriter, She then made a handwritten copy of the report to turn in
A, . to the DSE, keeping the typewritten copy for self- -briefing. She brought
YW

rant ow 5 = “ an Vd dnmnd tenn dns .
. the typewritten copy cut with hoz. Moliswing 15 a literal tranclation:

Ie , ~\ ‘ . che Be be AT tie

: : vr.) srnesto ‘@MAKTA and hig wite Lolita: I do not know them
very well. at fr can Say about them is what Y have heard, that -they :
‘are old friends of the family, and that the doctor took a trip to Mexico
with AKCOG-3'a uncle latter's election,
Nagter £h6 3 5

b, Sr, Pedro CARRILLO and his wife Margot: He is a teh or o>
Justo ®CARRILYD and has been a friend of the Yanity for a long time.
They sympathize with the Revolution in some aspects, but their daughter
(who I think is engaged to the son of AMCOG-2) left Cuba for exile, and
this caueed them to change. I do not know why their daughter had to.
' take asylum,

Lina’
Piel. 6. ‘pr.\ oscar ' “baw and his wife War arita; Within the family
‘she has the nickname e. s a judge. ntil very recently he
‘was neutral, but now it seems t at they have loaded him with work and

he ia ina very bad mood because I believe he has the work of eight
cases,» She does not sympathize much with the Revolution, They have no
~ childfen, but aimost all of her family is abroad which I think is her
: p®incipal reason for being discontented. b. Avda peD4Id
Ct vata Te ene BO Pa AI
~fedet a, Bra, Nenita def*CARAMES: She 1s the wife of/fnu CARAMES,
the former Chie¥ of Police of Havana. She has a daughter by him whom .

she<bringe to. lunch every Sunday, and she is also caring for a son of
. CARAHES who is insane and in an asylum. I do not believe that at the
moment she is on good terms with her husband who is abroad, and there-
fore she is neither against nor in favor, Actually I believe she is
afraid that the ‘situation will change and her husband will return,

weg) gr: Fer indo/$STEFFANI: An elderly gentleman who is the —
‘gather of an Intimate friend of AMCOG-2, who out of pity has given him.
a; Standing invitation for ever unday. To be sure, the poor fellow

ne

CLASSIFICATION

SECRET

on


--- Page 13 ---
? , abe ad re SOP NT
¢, Eisa/@pIAz Biart: Her family nas been friendly with/ the °
AMCOG family for many years, They ware school friends, Bie asa
sister abroad and a brother who is in priaon, Her father and mother
seldom come to the house, A sister of hertz is a doctor of some farm, §
All she does ig obtain medicines for the piisoners, thereby causing
a lot of trouble for AMCOG-2, AMCOG-3 and the old man. wid gor 2997/4

ee g. Joaquin ancuez and his wife Sara: <According to what I
ave heard, he is a travelling salesman ror 50me laboratory.» His wife

is the sister ef the wife of the old man's two nephews, Pancho and

' ACOG=-3 (sic). I have also heard that she is always trying to get

medicine. for her son who, from what I have heard, is abnormal.

te eee qilaks be Loe :
ee h. BANCHEZ Pessino; She lost ‘both her
father and no er wnen she was een years Old, and the AMCOG family

took her in as an adopted daughter. The old man paid for her education.

She worka in the emergency hospital. She is not openly opposed to the
regime, but nevertheless the separation from her brother and her relati
has greatly affected her. aie st dada toa tts hae Oe a cA oe

by Jot”

{Dry Vicente (*LAGO and his wife Maria Julia: His brother
Roberto LAGOS rd died some years ago, was Pola’s first husband, They
have two sons abroad. From what I have heard, he devotes himself ex~_

clusively to his professian, and it is she who is most upset by: the

separation from her children, -../. -.-s S08 2. ett :
Ted yg, worcedos/evaibEs sacks, A ‘cage very similar to that of
BTEPFANI, excep S @ woman who is a ver 00

jend of
' AMCOG-2'a husband, Aan stein the same situation with her relatives
abroad, She is. “just one more of the many refugees in search of warmth -
and friendship, with no friends left in Cuba. .

\ .
mar k. Julio /SBRAVO: A long-time friend of Pancho, all his family
ig abroad. He is andther case of warmth and friendship, he uses the-: .
swisming pool a lot, he ie alone, I have even seen him cutting trees
with AMCOG-3, a typical case of an unhappy man, in the afternoons he
_ playa chess with the old man, and I have never heard him say anything
' bad about anybody, not even about the situation, the only thing - - as
natural - he misses his daughters ond his weber a he th 4

-- ne¥! 4, Raquel RcASKGRAN: the “widow. “ot the Director of Culture in}

Grau Government, Jesus CASAGRAN, and sister of Raul LAZARO who was |:
: itary aide to both Grau and Prio, She is very highly regarded by —
the family. I have never heard her express herself in any way against.

the Government; I vous call her neutral, “

ee: \ fet a MAT Awd btigad by fel CLIVE tested
79" gp. olga RECENT Former wife of Jose Maria. “de -1a7Agu
_@he comes to e se U her two daughters and hermother who-.is: a.
cousin of Sra,. Paulina, AMCOG-2 helped her a lot. in hiding her b

during the Batista tyranny. I have also heard that AMCOG-3 helpe
with her divorce. Apparently she does not sympathize with th
although I believe that it is out of spite against her husban
her's name is Leopoldina SANCHEZ Vda. de Crecerte, and her:
Ais fonga. ae

Fle Seek tics
anférits See

gease of family warmth,
© the house in sear

257703
0 who is a

=)

ast thrée her aa and has become.a very good” fr
ho’ in reality it was her cousin who.



--- Page 14 ---
14-00000

“ABUOG Kamiiy 10x many ‘youre sso nee eee ew ow ae ee
sister abroad anda brother: who is in prison, Her father and mother | |
weldon come” to. the house, A sister of hers is a doctor of some. farm, .
All ‘ghe“does is obtain medicines for the’ prisoners, thereby causing |,” oe Fy,
a lot of trouble for AMCOG-2, AMCOG-3 and the old man, aa Jer 2 eT tL *

.

g.» Joaguin Shancusz and his wife: Sara: CAccording: to what I
ve heard, he {8 a trave ng s&Tesman ror some laboratory. >.His wife
is the sieter of the wife of the old man's two nephews, Pandho and
AMCOG-3 (sic). I have also heard that she is always trying to: get
‘medicine for her son who, from what Y have. heard, ig abnormal.
FE ve qntak "
BANCHEZ’ “Poza ino: She lost both her

pa ‘oh. (Dr, Maria Dolores | .
father and mother when she was rteen years old, and the AMCOG family

took her in as-an adopted daughter. The oid man paid for her education.
She is like a daughter to him, and like a sister to the nephew and niecd,
She works in the emergency hospital. She is not openly opposed to the
regime, but nevertheless the separation from her brother and her relatives
has greatly affected her, - sit tawyutin sf ay I

fp 42t

~ ‘ (Dry Vicente feLAco and his wife puerta sue ue: His brother
Roberto LAO who Sohne years ago, was Pola’s first husband, They
have two sons abroad. From what I have heard, he devotes. himself _ex-
clusivyely to his professian, and it is she who is most t upset oy the.
separation from her children, -..:. -..9% 20. 20

tp a

j. wercedes/eVALDES aacés: a case very similar to that of
STEPFANI, excep 3 @& woman who is a very good friend of ck.
AHCOG-2's husband, jand aye in the same situation with her relatives
abroad, She is just one more of the many refugees in search of warmth
and friendship, with no friends left in Cuba,

nae k. Julio /SBRAVO: A long-time friend of Pancho, all Kis family
ie abroad. He is another case of warmth and friondship, he.uses the
swimaing pool a lot, he is alone, I have even seen him cutting trees
with AHCOG=3, a typical case of an unhappy man, in the afternoons hs
Plays chess with the old man, and I have never heard him say anything
bad about anybody, not even about the situation, the only thing - as is
natural - he misses his daughters | and his water etit & san a OT aw

- one 4?! Raquel ACASKGRAN: The “vidow ri the Director of Culture in
ernment, sesus CASAGRAN,

the Gre Qrau Gove Jesus CASAGRAN and sister of Raul LAZARO who was
aifit aide to both Grau and d Prio. She is very highly regarded by —
the fam ly I have never heard her express herself in any way against.

the Government ; I would call her neutral,

wet aos . af ote dom As. aed eeped fob LIATM te so
aaah orgs Rotten: Former wite of Jose Maria de la feullera>

she comes to e se Ww her two daughters and hermother who is a.
cousin of Sra, Paulina,  AMCOG-2 helped her a lot in hiding her husband
during the Batista tyranny. I have also heard that AMCOG-3 helped her
with her divorce. Apparently she does not sympathize with the Revolutia

although I believe that it is out of spite against her husband, Her
mother’s name is Leopoldina SANCHEZ Vda. de Crecente, and her nickname
A isPRonga. : a :

: Jn 08 ceo
sn. Hilda Foyle
ank}¥*PAEZ and o os@'

family warmth,

She has wanted to leave Cuba
ever able to, This ig her principal obsession
t of her mother as well, She has been coming to the house a lot
ast thre @ years, and has become a very good friend of the -

Be th in reality | At, was her cousin who was a better friend

\ ve ‘tg
: poldina Brave: Thia couple has
two children who are really hers from her first arr age, Manolito and
Lourdes, He has a a leaning as in Havana, and ir know that she has



--- Page 15 ---
Pemmenete

before ashe married J, AGUERO, Politically speaking, she follows the
Grau line, She is more or less neutral, and devotes herself to her
teaching work. He devotes himself exclusively to his. work,
pre p. -Manue] *COMPANIONI and his wife Alicia: They have been
acquaintances [) an Yor many years, although it was not
a close friendship, rather a friendship of Montmartre, Tropicana, etc.
A daughter of theirs is abroad, He too was a very good friend of Armand
PEO who used to be a friend of the family, and now in the course of time
they have become closer friends of the family. In other words it is
another case of friendship caused by being abandoned by others. He has
& small deodorant factory in the same house where they live. They both
_ have their mothers here. L : .
Pa et

wee See sa 4
J ae q- Jack/#CONNILt, 1 and his wife Marina: His mother has been @
very goad friend o amiliy for many years, and she was a school
friend of the two nieces of the old man, This couple have always heen
friends of the family, the more so now that so many of their friends
have left Cuba,

71. AMPAUNA-14 turned this report over to "Carlos" on 11 or 12
November, At this meeting he asked her to try to make contact with
AMFAUNA-3's brother who he said had- been transferred to a hospital in
Las Villas. AMFAUNA-14 said she would try, but thought it would be: .
difficult, This was the last time she saw "Carlos,'"' He telephoned her
again on 16 November t ask what was new, and this was their last ]
telephone contact.

72, When AMFAUNA-14 arrived at AMCOG-3's house at about 2000-hours
on 15 November 1963 tor the regular Friday night supper, he took her
aside and said he wanted to speak to her privately later. At about
4330 hours she went to his room. There he told her that he had received
orders that she was to leave Cuba the following week. He said that
precise instructions were to come on 16 and 17 November, so he made a

lunch date with her for Sunday noon at his house.

73. AMFAUNA-14 was frightened by this. She did not sleep well
Priday or Saturday nights, and spent Saturday in her home.

74. Sunday afternoon in AMCOG-3's house, AMCOG-3 told her that she
was to leave the following day. She said that she did not want to.
AMCOG-3 responded that this was an order, He said that the DSE would
probably arrest her again soon, and for her own safety and that of other
she must leave. He added that there were others who were to leave too,
whose departure had been made conditional upon her own, .

75. AMFAUNA-14 asked whether AMCUTLER-2 were one of these other
people who were to leave too, and AMCOG-3 replied that she was.
14 told him that she thought AMCUTLER-2 would not agree to leave. .
said that he thought she would because the orders had been couched in
very strong terms,

76. He then showed her the instructions, both for herself and for
AMCUTLER-2. He had her type her instructions on a piece of paper, and

then memorize them,

77, Then AMCOG-3 gave AMFAUNA-14 the following verbal. messages" ‘to
deliver when she reached JMWAVE: .

: (a) A colonel fnu LANDEIRA, a tank expert who had ‘been. in the
Cuban Army under GRAU and PRIO, is a prisoner on a farm in Havana Pro=
vince. He is given three days off per week to go home. His wife knows
in advance when he will be coming out, AMCOG-3 does not know the wife}
but has indirect contact to her, AMCOG-3 says the man is honest and

‘ intelligent and B real soldier, and if we want him out AMCOG-3 can
arrange it. : Lo

: b) As of about 1800 hours on 17 November; a youl gim

infiltrated Anto Cuba and had been hiding at the h ‘1

CLASSIFICATION



--- Page 16 ---
PAE

PRENSA Hi

oneaenee

- ore oe Oo ef . 7 . . a . a .
DISPATCH |. Sse RE: . \UFUGA- 14894

had been noved to a new hiding place, AMCOG-3 was considering trying

to help the young man into asylum in the Uruguayan Embassy through a

certain ("Pepin") whose identity is not known to AMFAUNA-14 but; who she
thinks is ot" UFuguayan attache.

{c) AMCOG-3 is out of one-time pads and needs a resupply.

(d) It is very possible that AMCUd-3 may be able to obtain
and forward a copy of AMFAUNA- 14 DSE dossier.

78. On Monday morning, 18 November, AMFAUNA~-14 dressed as she had
been instructed, and atuffed a pair of slacks and sneakers into the
straw handbag which she had been told to carry. At 1300 hours she left
her office and proceeded on foot to the coiner of Atares and Arango in
Reparto Luyano, arriving there at 1400 hours. Here she exceeded her
instructions, waiting for AMCUTLER~-2 not five minutes but fifteen, She
then walked very slowly toward Calzada Luyano, hoping that AMCUTLER-2
might overtake her, This consumed another ten minutes, and by the time
she reached the Calzada Luyano it was too iate for. her to walk the re-

mainder of the distance, so she took a taxi,

78. AMFAUNA-14 discharged the taxi one block before theParque de
la Virgen del Camino and walked the rest of the way. She went to the
sbrine where she prayed for a few minutes, and then sat on a bench
from which she could see the whole park.

80. At 1510 hours a 1954 Buick taxi arrived at the park. The
driver stayed in the car, and two men ~ a colored man and a fatr-haired
man - got out and walked around for about ten minutes, Finally they
approached her and gave the challenge, to which she gave the correct
response, One of the men then said simply "Follow me". They took her
back to the taxi and put her in the back seat with one of the men, the.
other two riding in front. .

81. . They headed out of the city. When the reached the Carretera
de Varadero, one of the men asked her politely if she would mind keepin
her eyes directed down toward the floor and not look out the window.
She rode this way for about two hours, By then it was dark, and she wa
told she could look up again. She took advantage of the opportunity to
change into her slacks and sneakers.

82. Finally the car stopped, and she and her two escorts got out;
They walked a long time, At one point, whistle signals were exchanged
with someone in the darkness, and two other men appeared, one of whom:
was AM@KE}2. AMPAUNA-14 and AMWEE}2 greeted each other politely, but ©
pretendedonot to know eech other. J

83, They did a lot more walking and joined up with another man, wh
turned out to be the radio man. He had a lot of equipment with him,
and AMPAUNA-14 and AH@EE}2 helped to carry it.

84. They now reached the mangrove and began to walk through water,
At one point their guide became briefly lost, but found his way again
almost.-immediately, When they came to the open water, one of the guide
went forward and signalled, The boat came in in response to the signal
AMPAUNA-14 ;\ +2, and the radio man walked out into knee-deep water
and climbed into the boat, which already had a crew of two,

85. The boat proceeded out to an unidentified key. The crew con-
cealed it in the mangrove, cleverly lacing and tying branches together
over it to form a camouflage cover, There they went to sleep.

86. The following day, 19 November, was spent at this spot. A
radio message was received during the day, At night the boat put -out
for Cayo Wegano, The waves were enormous, and. AMFAUNA-14 was terribly

seasick. The boat remained at the rendezvous point until 1045 hours, -”

with AMPAUNA-14 pleading for the crew to return to land, saying she .
would rather be shot than remain so seasick. Finally the crew did put
back, saying that the ship probably would not come because thé sea was



--- Page 17 ---
“tallied perfectly, and the AMHICK team were well briefed on all of the

- dnetructions reached her, They were taken, she said, by Lolita FORMOS

" AMCUTLER-2 had visited AMFAUNA-14's apartment twice, On both occasi

UFGA- 12894

a”,
; 67. Wednesday, 20 November, was Bapent on the same key. A very, °
long radio message was received during the day. AMFAUNA-14 and ‘AN WEE, 2
both helped the radio man to decipher it, and their combined efforts
took about three hours,’ Then they put out again for the Cayo Megano ;
rendezvous point. By this time their drinking water was all gone, |
The boat was overloaded, so much of the food'and equipment waa left.
behind on the key. Again no ship appeared. -This time, instead of |
returning to their original hiding Place, the crew took the boat to
Cayo: Mosquito. i

i

{,
: : i
Here they spent the remainder of. tha‘night, and all ct  mureday
21 November, ‘Their water was gone, there was very little focd left,
and there was only enough gasoline left for one more jone-way trip”
out to the rendezvous point. At 1400 hours on 21 November another
radio message was received With the combined efforts of the radio
man, AMPAUNA-14 and AWE g| it took between two and three hours to
decipher it. Everybody: Ea very optimistic; they were all sure that

they would be picked up that night. 7

89. Promptly at 2300 hours. the ship was seen approaching. ©
boat put out immediately, and 4ts passengers were taken aboard. the shi
AMPAUNA-14 was taken into the sick bay where she was given a pill
little water, ‘md somewhat later some varm broth, }

90; From the moment she stepped into the ‘boat on 18 November, unt iif
she was hauled out by ‘the armpita on 21 November, AMFAUNA~14 riever lef
the boat. Her side and legs were bruised from the pounding of the
waves: against: the boat. A little blood vessel in her‘right eye was
broken by a twig snapping in her face as she walked through the man-
grove, This was treated by the ship's! doctor, i

el, ” AMFAUNA~ 14 says that the AMHICK team performed very wel, The
pickup in the park was. done excellently, The slight delay while they
looked her over, she says, was due to the fact that the men had ex-
pected another woman to be with her, and they were waiting a few minute
in case the other woman should show up, The AMHICK. team said that the
had also boen briefed that she would be wearing her hair in a bun,
She had not been briefed accordingly, and she was wearing her hair
down her back in a pony tail, This discrepancy did not cause any con-
fusion, because every other item of the visual recognition signals :

92, AMFAUNA-14 was impressed by the precise timing of the team's:
movements, by the fact that everybody was where he was supposed to be
at the time indicated, She expressed admiration for their seamanship,
and their ability to pick out one spot of mangrove from another in
the pitch darkness,

93. She says that, during these trying days, the team members were
always in cals control of the situation, and never failing in their
courtesy to her,

94. Regarding AMCUTLER~-2, AMFAUNA-14 is sure that the exfiltration

who had been standing by for them from Friday to Sunday. What Lolita
did with them, ANFAUNA-14 does not. know, She knows that we had
suggested that Lolita take them to AMFAUNA-1's mother, but she also
knows that we had indicated to AMCOG-3 that AMFAUNA-1's mother might
be under surveillance, so she thinks Lolita might have taken them
directly to AMCUTLER-2. In any case, she knows that messages sent
previously by AMCOG~3 to AMCUTLER-2 reached the latter, and she sees
no reason to assume that these instructions did not.

95.. It does not surprise AMFAUNA~14 that AMCUTLER-2 did not follow
the.orders,  ANCUTLER-2, she says, plays her own game with little con-
ration for others, Between the time that AMFAUNA-1 left Cuba on
J September, and the time that AMFAUNA-14 was arrested on 7 Oé¢tobe Ts

nei,



--- Page 18 ---
7 ; TSVUSSC INE HUE
SECRET? uFcA-i2804
AMFAUNA-14 had asked her to remove the suitcase that AMFAUNA-i had ieft
behind, but on both occasions AMCUTLER-2 had found some excuse not to
do so, When AMFAUNA-14 visited AMCUTLER-2 in her home in. Guanabacoa
on 3 November for the purpose of coordinating their cover stories,
AMCUTLER-2 did not seem very interested in coordinating stories or
anything else. AMFAUNA-14 believes that AMCUTLER-2 may be working for
the-Geceed=<Front-of the Second Front of the Escambray, becaus@,-her 7...
‘very close friend Lolin *CORREOSO is the fiancee of.Hipolito ARRAURI fe
who wes a collector for this organization. Among other reasgns
possibly keeping AMCUTLER-2 in Cuba, AMFAUN‘-14 says that AMCUTLER-2's
mother is sick with cancer, and there may be something wrong between
AMCUTLER- 1 and AMCUTLER-2. HE Cetin 48 .

96. - AMPAUNA-14 algo had her reasons for not wanting to pees Cuba.
Besides the dangers of the trip, she would he leaving her mother and
father in a dangerous position, because the DSE had forced her to
sign a confersion implicating them. While she appears to be trying not
to be overly critical of AMCUTLER-2, she has commented that AMCUTLER-2
knows far more members of the AMFAUNA net than she herself does, so
that the reasons requiring the exfiltration of AMFAUNA-14 should be
even more compelling for AMCUTLER-2,

End of Dispatch


