
--- Page 1 ---
14-0000.

104-10177-10135| | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |

Pa" 2593

CONFIDENTIAL

*,

os NOTICE

THIS FILE HAS BEEN PROCESSED AND RETIRED, DO NOT
ADD ANY DOCUMENTS TO THIS FOLDER, FORWARD CS
DOCUMENTS THAT SHOULD BE INCLUDED IN THIS FOLDER

TO RID/RPU GE-58.

NOTICE

CONFIDENTIAL |

Tt)



--- Page 2 ---
14.0000
i
{
H

—

CONFIDENTIAL .

NOTICE |

THIS FILE‘HAS BEEN PROCESSED AND RETIRED, DO NOT
ADD_ANY DOCUMENTS TO THIS FOLDER, FORWARD CS
DOCUMENTS THAT SHOULD BE INCLUDED IN THIS FOLDER

TO RID/RPU GE-58.

NOTICE

CONFIDENTIAL

2593

Ts


--- Page 3 ---
14-0000

“SSTERUEAD PEUETE Wd AG CP HPAr APEPRS Py

HAUSE SELECT CYRIEPEEE OT ASSASS DUAL EO SAATP METRE RS

PELE TITEE/NUUREP/VOLUNE Ss YS Ae Fer Ot COA BE TE Te
LALLA, AD PTE EE ee Fu
, ( : : : —-
WL Tot eS LEE PoC TECT

ETE MET FLL DWE oe .

INCLUSIVE DATES: SADE FE tO DS

“CUSTODIAL UNIT/LOCATION:
‘ rots

DELETIONS, UF ANY: _

“PATE BATT: ° WE STGRATURE OF —

RECEIVED [RETURNED PRINT ‘NAME REVIEWING OFFICIAL

2 if ;

Shlre |3fafo¢| Dan Hardeony | Be a

—- a e

NO DUCUMENTS MAY BE COPTED OR REMOVED FROM THIS FILM.
= ——— Oe



--- Page 4 ---
14-00000
y

j
i
{

CATE PESE VLVEP VEE AG CI Sony

UOUSP SELPOPp PPTL Ob AGS ASS DUAR USS! SPATE MDUBERS

FULE TITLE ZNUNREP/VOLUIE | SA
LK
‘ -_
Sf Te ee
COT ete PLL

INCLUSIVE DATES: SGSA Fe 8h DS
“CUSTODIAL UNIT/LOCATION:

DELETIONS, TR ANY:

Pear ep len ATT: “——REVIESTED BY UST GATT 7
CPP ETE NATE REVEEWING OFFICIAL

Se

NO DUCUMENTS MAY BE COPTER OP REMOVER FROM THIS FILM.



--- Page 5 ---
14-0000

:
4
at

me ' .
: ; RAPCE Riviey G
= 7 Adp Pouch Sttanny TC3~se1801

Chief, BHD | 29 Decombar 1952

astinge \
Chief of Statton, Santiago \

ZACACTUS, Chile.
Poluinatorel's oresFerra Couiract t

Roferences iCs~7-1668 : ;
1. Attachod herowith please find a-pro forma coatrnct whieh has been preyared
for Fulminater-l's stynature, Uo hin stated that he is in agroenoat with its
provioiona. If this ccatract 4a satisfactory pleaso retura it for Mia aigaature

at such tine az hia clesrance is obtained.

2, FULSIWATER-1 has shown himself to be very enthusiastic regerding the proposed
eaploymeat with this Organisation oud is anxious ty start the tusks to°bo
assigned to hin as scon es his clearanco ds obtained and the negossary instructions

ere ferwardad to this Ststione :
3. To carry crt the covert prepa, ands ‘wapeot of FOLLY LAATueL a duties he has
highly rogormended the uoe of Victer FOSLOTE Crieca, Tho latvor ia a Chilean,
about §3 yenrs ef age, whe fy foreman af rULMINATcL@1's printing shop. be alae
livos on the previses and would be the only persea who would have to know if the
presses ute used at ni,tt. Ke da not a member of tau printers’ laber union and
his pest actions h.vo indicated te FU NiATULel that he is 1008 antlouwnumist.
Be has Loon employed mary yeara by Ma enzic and Coe, @ Uritish firm wich shared
the print shog facilitias with Fev Selta pressus. However, PULMIRACEL <1 fa
equipment is entirely eeparate Fron Neckonsle's aud if the sovert work is done
at night aa is anticipated it ia FULYIMaTE&-l's opinion that FOSLEfh could run
off the werk without ary possible interference from othar individuals. another
of PGBIz T's advantages is the fact that he is able to perform all the printing
oporationgs which will be nevesuary to pub out sormal propaganda and similer
material ai this would eliminate the need to use other peraong in the
preparation of the prepajanda material.

4 PCSL°TE hus been closely ocnaected with bnglish and Aaglo-~Chilean officials
of LacKausie & Co. fer many yours but it 1s believed logical to preauns that if

he is paid generously for hia werk in thia connestion,with the understanding

that the work is of a completely confidential nature and of a lonze-term basis, that
he will agree to complete secrwoy regarding the work, Amount of payment to
FC2LeT2 wiil have to be determined whon there is scze iniicaticn ua to the snount
of work to.be dono, 4 local investigation of this pereon has been initiated and
the results will be forw:rded us soon .s possible, No derogatory information

on this person spears in this Station's files,

x Ay Ian line with the authorisation reealved in 10588-1465, FULETHATFR-1 will be

’

RAPOK


--- Page 6 ---
TCS+-A~1801

paid from other operational funds the peso equivalent of hia salary doginning
1 January 1952. It was ecnaiderod aevassary to bezin his paymenta as of that
date in order to insure his contimied atay ia Chile. This Station would
apprectato clarification of JREDICT-Chile to wnich, acsording to TC..-i/+1468,
this oxpenses doul., 56 oharget for a linttod time.

.Sf FOLMINATER-I's woekly newspaper 10 61% owed by him, and as indicetod in
attached contract, he has agreed to keap tho paper for at least two yearoe.
The other owner, wiz haa taken no activo interest whatsoever in the operation,
management or zolicies of the paper, apparently plana to sell his share.

The prospective buyer 1a not known but in any event PULNINATER-1 will retain

tha controlling interest.

"fo FULKINATEN-} 48 willing to spend the necessary tine in Nashington for
training and will be ready to depart immediately when so advised. However, his
wife is oxpecting a baby around 80 December 1951 according to her doctor's
ealculations, and FULHINATER-1 would prefer to remain in Santiago for at least
a fow days after the ohild ia born. Hoe is certain that the birth will take
place within a weok's time and it is hoped that his presence in tishington will
not be required prior to 15 January 1952, As a cover story for his trip,
FULYNATER=1 has advised that au opticn nag been beusht on ene of his plays
and that a trip te Mew York to diseuss the play with the prospective producer
ig completely logical, Further, he has an estate in Texas whioh is in. litigation
and ahich could logically require his proeonce there, FULMINARER=1 asked that
ho bo allowed to ssend a day or two in fexas oither en hie trip vo er back to
settle thia estate and 1t te reeocmended that he ve allowed tc do so in order to
provide his cover story with more basis in fact. .

a7, PULYTNATER-1 hes been told thet he mist pay Cnited States income tax on his
ealary received from this Crganizatioa, He ig at a loss, however, to kaow how
this added incone can be satisfactorily and securely explained to the Department
of Internal Revenue. In sccerdence with the conten:a of Field Regulations 50-13,
this matter is being brought tc Headquerters attention with a request fer
instructions as to how thia matter is to be handled.

c ra af of Station

“ : Kenneth J, Tondler

efs



--- Page 7 ---
; A¥tachrent: TCS-A-1501

Pro Forma Contract Witt Fulninator=1

Wo heredy gontract you to perform services aa rejuired under the following

gonditons:

1)

z)

3)

4).

5)

8)

7}

cs 4

You agreo to remain in Chile for at lesat two years from the .
date of this contract and yeu also agreo not to sell during
this pericd your share of the South Pacifio Bail of which, it

is understood, you are a part owner and maintain the controlling

interest. (51%)
It is agreed by you that this Organisation will not becone

involved in any way, financially or ctherwise, in ths South --——----

Facifie Nail,

You will carry out the duties assigned te you by the

appropriate official to tho best of your ability devoting ~ =_ _
43 mich time to them as is reasonably possible, taking into
ecasideration your ovligation to manago the South Pasifis

Hail as the overt reason ror your residenoe in Chile.

You will bo paid the sun of U. S. $5,940 per anounm for your
services to this Organisation, and you agree, in accordance -
with subsequent instructions, to pay the United States Inoome
tax which will be due on this wount. Your salary will do paid |

ponthly.

You agree tv make yourself availablo to travel to Washington
for about a one month's stay to-undorgo training as requirod. :
Travel and living expenses during this trip will be paid by
this Crganizaticn. It is not known when this trip will take
place but it is believed that it will be in the near future.

You will be granted paid vacations during the period of your

‘employment in Chile in acocerdance with applicable Chiloan

laws.

Should local travel] be required by thia Organization, your
travel and living oxpenses while away from Santiago will be

made availablo. _ a ae . eo —

Reasonable entertainment expenses, after prior ccnaultation
‘with thia office, will be reimbursed.

‘Ie is agreed by you that you will not expect sick leave
benefits to acoure to you under the terns of this contracts

“and it ia understood that ysur employment by thia Organisation

will not entitle you to retirement and other similar benefits
of United States Governisnt employees.

10) Tt is understeed by you that the terns of this contract are

re


--- Page 8 ---
14-0000

‘+. ‘éttachment, 2C3-A=-1801 a

Be

- : 5
provisional upon tha satidfactory clearance ef your name by
the appropriate officiuls.

11) Tho effective dete of this contract 1s the date on which your
satisfactory sloarance is reooivod and the term shall be
indofinito. , .

12) The termination of this contract may be effected at any time
upon written notios, but without advance notice, by this
Organisation, auch termination te be effective uzon recetst
of the notice. The termination of this contract will not
release you from any provisions of security oaths which you
may be required to take.

rover!



--- Page 9 ---
jo

ee

14-0009
q
{
j
q
dq
i
| SECRET
= .
] yi?
Project Outline Clearance Sheet
Project Title FOG PB eset Amendment No, __—~Project No.
: Developed by: B ae Wb. _Whbp 24 ‘$7 be
Case ©. Organization , Date

VA Lf. LFh SL

Reviewed by: /V. SHY, Sno.

Date

Date

Date

Approved subject to conditions below: Le AZ 1t Af Fo
OR B. ~ Date

Conditions of approval:

OPC Form No, 1103 (Rev)
23 April 1951 3,4
. ro |

SECRET

iY


--- Page 10 ---
14-0000

ost Project Fagnoven oe Amancnent Ne,

PROJELT OUTLIIE

Type _Coerational

I. AUTHORIZATION :

Ae

Establishment "in the immediate future” of mechan ism capable ‘of
conducting psychological and political ‘farfare aimed at the
accomLighment of «HD missions (a) amd (b) in Chiles as set out

_ in Section II (paragraph 2.b.) of Annex 8 to the WID/OPC Strategic

Plan dated 1 November 1951, This task is assigned priority one in
Phase I (1 Jan ~ 30 June 52) in the aforementioned Plan.

TI. REFERENCES

A.

B.

_ Ge.

Budgetary data for this Project. (wee A)

Field dispatch (10S-A-1801) outlining the tems of this
Project, (ANNEX B)

Headquarters cable authorizing recruitment of FULMINATOR-1
for this Project as a contract agent. (ANNEX C)

III. PROPOSAL

A.

Statement

It is proposed to undertake the developme:.t in Chile of a group
or committee composed of Chilean nationals waich will engage
‘overtly and actively in enti-Cormunist work and will function as

a WHD mechanism for the accomplishment of WD missions (a) and Ce)
in Chile, as set forth in Paragraph I above.

As the first step in implementing the development of that committee,
it is proposed to engage the services of a high-calibre American
national in Chile as a contract agent at an annual salary of
#6,000.00 to

1. . Spot, recruit, and manage a qualified indigenous Chilean
who will act as organizer.of the aforsmantioned committee,
and

2. Act as cut-out and principal agent for « H, in the
operations of the committee. cee

At such time as developnent of the committee warrants, the
neceseary steps will be taken to plece the committee in the
proper relationship with the DIHASZAS foundation for purposes
of cover and support.


--- Page 11 ---
14-0000

RECOMMENDATION —

Backynound

The hvettean national in question is.a former WHD/OSO
agent (FULMINATOR-1) of proven ability, courage and
discretion,

FULNINATOR-1'3 presert occupation in Santiago, Chile,
provides him wit. excellent contacts and cover for
carrying out the tasks oroposed for hin above. .

He is part. omer of, and holds the controlling interest
(51%) in a Santiago printing and publishing’ establishment
that publishes an “nglish-laxguacze newspaper, The South
Pacific Mail, which FULMINATOR-1 edits. His establishment
Is well @quipced to handle a great variety of printing

“ jobs.

Current Status °

On 23 January 1952, WHD Headquarters authorized its
Santiago Field Station to hire FULSINATOR-1 as a

contract agent for a pericd of at least two years

(See ANNEXES B and D). In his agent capacity, FULMINATOR-1
will undertake to develop the cormittee referred to aoova
in Perasraph A of this Outline.

At such time as that development warrants, an Amendment
to this Project containing a statement of all new require-
ments, Will be submitted to conoetent authority for
soproval.

That there be allotted to this Project funds in the amount of
4,709.00 to provide salary for FULNINATOR-1 for the remainder of
Fiscal Year, to cover the cost of bringing him to Yashington for
a period of covert training, provide nis per dien allowance while
here, and transport him back to Santiago, Chile following that
training period.

OPERATIONAL DETAILS

Area of Operation
Chile
Operational Control

1. WED Headquarters will exercise final control of this
Project, and uct as its support unit.

\ ! 4-


--- Page 12 ---
14-0000

De.

E.

'*F

q.

2. The HY cleld Station, & Lago, Chile, will exercise
fleldicontrol of Project operations in accerdarce with
instructions from Feadquarters,

Personnel Recuired

mt to ect as Project principal agent
1).

One clenred, witting a
and cut-out (FULHUNAD

Communications Plan

Available VHD pouch and cable facilities vetweea Headquarters
and the Santiago Field Station,

Suvport Plan

1. Training

ft

The Project's principal agent will receive aoproximately
one month of covert training in washington, DB. C., and
return toChile. All exoenses in cemection with this
training are to be borne by WHD.

Peports Procedure .

Progress reports will be submitted to VHD Headeuarters by
the Santiago Field Station in accordance with Headquarters
directives.

Cover and Security
1. Cover

FULMINATOR-1 will remain in Chile in his present business
“position, As a cover story for his trip to washington for
covert training, FULNINATOR-1 has advised that an option

has been bought on one of his plays and that a trip to
New Yorx to discuss the play with the prospective producer
is completély logical.

2. Security

On 10 January 1952, wD received an C>C Operational Clearance
on FULMINATON-1.


--- Page 13 ---
14-00000

! -
: Communications between FULMINAPOR-1 dnd the Santiago
: theld Statiun wil at all times be carried on by means
of a secure cut-out. : ,

4
‘Since FUINT-ATOR-1's cover is ‘his overt business situation ae
: in which he is already established, and since that situation .
MF provides hin with printing and publishing facilities, it is

believed the. good operational security can be maintained

‘with a minimum of efrort in this Project.

VI. BUDGET DATA

See ANNEX A. (OPC Form No. bOk).

——



--- Page 14 ---
14-0000

SECRET
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET

INSTRUCTIONS: Offwar designaticas should be used in the "TO" columa  Undyy each comment a fine should bo drawn across sheet
apd each comment rembe-ed to corresporifwith the number in the "TO" caluma. Each « re shy sid inital (chock mark insuff.cient)
before furthor routeg This Routrg and Recerd Sheet should be retu.ned to Regutry. .

an,

of
\r,
\
i

0010 P [Cormnee . rar

three OH Coping ; 7
attache. * :

TOS eTTES-T us & coveasaiat Palatina OFFICa,

FORM NO. 51-10 SECRET

FEB 1950



--- Page 15 ---
14-00000 _ aoe

SECRET so,

a, Sota INFGRMATION °

mS :

. . 4, February 1952 ;

BELORANDUM POR:  WHD
SUBJECT: OPC Froject PBGROVEL
: 1. Subject projéct has been reviewed by this office and
no communications facilities beyond those already existing will

be required in seupport of the project.
2. It is intended that this memorandum shall constitute

the Communications Annex for PBGROVEL.

oD/or/ILE/mhj

Distribution:
Addressee - orig & 3
co/0P/Carpanter ~ 1 .
0d/OP/Fisher = 2 . t
SD/RE - 2 :

STCURITE HFGRMATION

SEGRET



--- Page 16 ---
14-0000

SO SECRET

| Peeords tak

‘ Oronet. I, <4

Vik GOANDON 22 ThE Feta

Meeting with Agent, Pow? D, LAGSVIN on 20 April 10f2

1, The sense of the following tuxt was obtoined &ing ,
en afternoon meeting with Agent LAGEYIN. Particinating in

the telh vere Messrs. Sryser ond Tatton and Agent LANCET,

Four rafor topics wero discussed and will be presented here

in the order in which they vere developed,

f 2, Printins Plant Problem: Mr. LANGEVIN indicated that '
‘ in two and a half to three months cortain financial oblige- °
tions woule core due. These consisted entirely in making an ,

: §S,00C payment arising from the purchase of equiprent for his fr
- Yrinting establishment, This ecuipment, vhich cost about ,
‘ $10,000 vhon purchased late in 1°51, consists of an Italien- :
made press, linotyre machine, Speed Graphic cameras, type, \
ete, The market value of this equinment (partly new and
partly used) is estimated to be at least $10,000, The mm of
23,000 represents the total indebtedness of LANGEVIN's plsnt
and is owed to a Mr, MACKENZIE of Casa Fackoncic, Mr, LALGSVIN
ray meet this payment by either (1) sccuring a loan from a Fort

hy Texas, bank using his share in family oil interests as
collateral, (2) taking on a Chilean partner, (3) getting the
money from a Chilean bank (which vould involve an 16% interest
rate) or (4) getting the morey elsovkere, Common agreement was
expressed on the undesirability of taling on a Chilean partner
since this vould be a security hazard in any future Fl work.
and vowld alse climinate the vossibility of using the plent as
cover for another agent. I&, LANGEVIN, asked about his nrevious
statement about leaving Chile after tuo years, roplied ths+ now
there wes no definite plan or desire in that direction, Ee
indicated he vould have sone ideasbout the possibility of
assistence from a Texas bark vithin a few weoks. Mr, LANCEYIN
also suggested that he would gladly use his earnings for tha
next tvo years from the-agency (26,0C0 per year) if the Agency
could mrt up the $6,000 in a lump sum, The printing firm is

et

new meking a profit above the salary which LANGEVIN takes out.

. 3. Prietirg on the Corittee: Mr, SINSER discussed the
overell tasks which Lax 1. is expected to perform. Muck
enphasis was placed on the need for security in explaining
this tyre of IW ectivity, particulerl; if and when DTHABELS is

SECRET


--- Page 17 ---
14-0000

»

{
$
‘
2

SECRET

2a

trought in, “Mr, LANGEVIN indtected thet kis cover for con=
tacting the Exbassy vas good, cond further indiceted that no
uncuthorised person in Chile knew of his U. S, Goverment
activities,

4. Information on FULLER: When questioned about the
discretion of FUPELER, LACGSVIii indicated complete confidence,
stating that she was very efficient and vould be useful in
essisting him in Pl work, IANGEVIN was thoroughly briefed on
the fact that FUELER must never !mow of DINATEAS or its con-
nection with the comuttee,

5, Mords-and Deeds: Mr, LANGEVIN stated thet the format,
paper, type and pkotoengraving of this pamphlet was far above

~ Chilean standards, He seid that Chile had only one printing

house capable of producing: such work, and no artists of the
ealiber exhibited in the pamphlet. He suggested a Spanish or
French attribution on poorer paper. The reproduction of posi-
tives is also not done in his plant, but rust be ecntracted for
at a Sentiago photoengraver's,

6, Details: Mr, LATGSVIN has opened cn account at
the Chemical Dank end Truct,. 74th Strcet cnd Madison Avenue,
New York City. All -duture monthly peyrents will be rade to
that bank, beginning tith the payment for April.

Leo E, Patton

SECRET



--- Page 18 ---
14-0000

id

SEGRi.

Cem CS CALE 2
TO: SANTIAGO ROTI
FRO: OPERATICIS, 16 MAY 52

OUT 77204

WASH 41154

TOs SAGOG CITE: WASEG
2. INFORM LANGEVIN EEADQUARTERS ATTEMPTING OBTAIN LOAN.

2. REQUEST LAKGEVIN NOTIFY jHADQUARTERS BEFORE CCMPLETING
ANY LCAN ARPANGEMEXTS ,

SECRET



--- Page 19 ---
14-0000

« ° SECRET ‘ ot

INSTRUCTIONS: Officer designations shoutd bo used in the "TO" column, Under each comment a lino should be drawn across sheet
and each comment numbered fo correspond with the number in the "TO" column, Each officer should initial (check mark insufficient)
before further routing. This Routing and Record Sheot should be returned to Registry.

1 See nae ne

f
i
:

FORM NO. 51-10 : SECRET

FED 1950



--- Page 20 ---
14-00000

28 May 1952

1

MEMORANDUM FOR: 0D/CO

STTENTICN: Mr, William Rowland
SURBJICT Project PBGROVEL, Amendment No. 1

1. Forwarded herewith are the original and two copies of subject
anendnent plus an extra copy of OPC Form Lola,

2. It is respectfully requested that approval of subject amend-

“ment: "be expedited as the Project Financial Data, Form Lola, indicates
- that’ payment of eight thousand (88,000. CO) dollars to PAUL D. LANGEVIN ~

must be made on or about 20 June 1952.

- 3. Subparagraph six of the Proposal indicates that as a prerequi-~
‘pite to issuance of a loan to LANCEVIN the latter will be required to
submit a comclete nameplate inventory of all.machinery and equipment in-
volved in the loan transaction,“its physical existence in his custody,
his title to the pr:perty, and.an a-oroximate evaluation of its worth
(as. determined by WHD station personne]}. WHD will be prepared to do
this shortly after Amendment No. 1 is approved and the necessary funds
are available for payment.

4. Subparagraph five of the Proposal indicates that details of the
loan contract and selection of the appropriate legal instrument to secure
a lien on the machinery and equipment will be arrived at through joint
agreement of WHD, CCC and the Legal Division. These financial details
will be arranged subsesuent to approval of the amendment in question and
will comprise the financial plan governing the expenditure of the funds
requested.

sa Mera 0/0/40

ye
Chon
. .C, KING
. WH
Distribution
Orig: op/Coy
ce: Special Contracting Officer (Mr, J.L. Bischoff)
cM (Mr. Emest W. Pittman)
Chief, Branch I
Project File PBCROVEL WHD/P&O
Chrono WHD/PEO


--- Page 21 ---
1400000,

25 Juno 1952

MEMORANDUM FOR: ASSISTANT DIRECTOR FOR POLICY COORDINATION .
SUBJECT: Project PBGROVEL, Proprietary, WHD ,

, le  CM-concurs in making a loan of U, S. $8,000 with interest
at 4 percent per annum to contract agent Paul D. Langevin (pseudo).
This loan is to be fully secured by a chattel mortgage, or whatever
other ‘legal instrument is recognized by the appropriate Chilean .
Court as establishing a first lien on the machinery and equipment, - Oo
valued at approximately US. $10,000, against which the loan is be- - eo ‘ :
ing made. Principalvand-interest are to be amortized in monthly
installments of U."S. $500, which represents the totel salary
accruing each month to the agent. The term of the loan will be for
the time required to liquidate principal and interest in full.

2. fhe contract agent will submit a complete name-plate

inventory of all machinery and equipment involved as collateral for
the loan along with his proof of title to and its physical existence i

in his pessession,.
Maite Kee Gila
PRESTON L. SUTPHEN

Chief, Comercial Division

CM/RDOD/rs

Distribution:
orig & 2 - Addressee
1 - Dpa
1 - WHD
3- CH
2 ~ RI/FI

SECRET



--- Page 22 ---
14-00000

___SECRET ee
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET

“INSTRUCTIONS: Officer designations should be used in the "TO" column. Under each comment 4 tine should be drawn across sheet
and each comment numbered to correspond with the number in the “TO column, Each officer should initia! (check mark insufficiont)

before further routing This Routirg anil Record Sheet should be coturned to Registry.

mo /er.t

bate
7 July 1952

OFFICER'S
INITIALS,

SUISSE v. & COVERRAINT PINT ED CHER:

FORM NO. Stet0 a SECRET



--- Page 23 ---
veep ate ere we

won .

Office Memorandum + " UNITED STATES : GOV3KNNENT

DATE: 7 hay 1982

TO, =: ADPC *
VIA: 09/co ;
FROM : C/A

SUBJECT: Information on, Paul D. LANGEVIN :principal agent of Project PBGROVEL

1. Paul D. LASCEVIN 4s the principal agent of subject project, approved
12 February 1952, Project PBGROVEL contemplates the establishment in Santiago of
an indigenous anti-communist committee which, when developed, will be placed

under DTHABEAS,

2. Subject agent was granted an OSO clearance 3 October 1950, and
proved his usefulness as a cut-out and in a DYCLAVIER printing operation. Subject
was granted an operational clearance for, DYCLAVIER work 1) January 1952, and
received covert training in New York City in April. Since his return to
Saritiago, subject has engared in spotting and recruiting an indigenous principal
agent who will in turn organize the anti-comiunist committee,

2 3. “Subject is the Texas-born 30 year old, owner and publisher of the .
“English-Language weekly “South Pacific Nail" of Santiago, Subject has also had
acting and writing experience since his completion of wartime service in the

U, S. Air Force. Subject has been in Chile since November 19149 and at present
has a two year contract as agent for this agency, signed 25 January 1952. Subject
has indicated on several occasions a continuing interest in obtaining a pernanent

position with this agency.

4. Due to the Subject's travel to New York for training, several
officers of WHD have had an opportunity to observe and evaluate subject. Opinion
on subject has been consistently favorable and he has impressed all as a person
of high intelligence and personal integrity. Subject has had a varied occupational
background, excellent education, and exhibits exceptional poise and a good
appearance.

x Sherer
. soe : io J. Co KING
~~



--- Page 24 ---
EORM NO. 51-10
FEB 1950"

UTING AND RECORD SHEET _

2. should be drawn across sheet
initial (check mark insufficient)



--- Page 25 ---
14-0000

a

KEECGRARDIE PCRa DEPUTY PORGTR (PLANS)
SUSIECT 4 Project PEGROVEL, Aneritront Mo,.1....----. ~~

1, Anowinent No, 1 to Project PECROVEL proposes tha loan
of the mm of $0,000 ot 4% intevest par anmm to a contract agent

in Santiago, Chile, in order that this agent may completa paynont

em michinery and equipment recently installed on the prexises of
the printing establishront of which esid agont 4s sols proprieter,

2. Tho propriety. ‘of CIA lending finde. for this. purpose has
boon reviewed by Orc/ NI who' 4a of the opinion that in principle
there should be no ol jeotion, The question of operational usa by
Ope hea boon raised with the 94 Diviaion and it has been stated —
that this equiznent, consisting of the press, Linctype machine,
Spocd Graphic emerany etce, gan bo uscd for Ope proparmxia pro]
Guetion purposes.

3. Tho quection of control of the contract azont vas dite
cussed ani it has been determined that the Coneral Comssl's Ofs
Plies 4s being requested to establish logel moans whereby the lien
or mortgace on tits equiprent wil be hold in tho nems of a cute
out, In thea event of any untoward action on tho part af the eae
terest enent or disagreement botwaen the agent and CLA, section can
be taken to asame eontrol of tho mechinery.

4. Ae is indieated in tho attached momoroniun fron tho Chief,

WH Division, the contract -acont is considered te ba an individual

of hin intelligence and porsenal intezrity. For this and the
shove listed reasons, it ts rocomrended that Aueninant No, 2 to
PECROVEL be appeoved in the amamt of $8,000.

at

Le FRANKLIN A, BDDSAY 0. 2 ee
aoe re Acting Assistant Director for
Policy Coontination

ore /@ o/ere fang

Distribution:
FRO - Grig. & 5
rp /P = 2
Projest Folder ol
M0 -

WOeIFT = 2



--- Page 26 ---
vera
(NSTRUCTIONS: Ofticer designations shauid be used in the "TO" cofumn, Under each comment a line should be drawn across sheet
anz each comment numbered to corres: snd wth the number in the “TO column, Eacu officer should initial (cheak mark insufficrent)

before further routing. This Routing ted Record Sheet should be returned ta Reaistry.

OFFICER'S:
INITIALS:

i

TG—WIE TUS. coveancat PeixtENe OFFER

FORM NO. 51-10 SECRET

FEB 1950

2 keene:


--- Page 27 ---
\
MEMORANDUM FORs DEPUTY DIRECTOR (PLANS)
ed
SUBJECT: Projeot PBGROVEL, Amendment No. 1

1. Amendment No. 1 to Project PBGROVEL proposes the loan
of the sun of $3,000 at 4% interest per annum to a contract agent
in Santiago, Chile, inorder that this agent may complete payment
on machinery and equipment recontly installed on the promises of
the printing establishment of which said agent is sole proprietors -
_., 2 The propriety of CIA lending funds for this purpose has
been reviewed by Ope/SRI who is of the opinion that in principle

“there should be no objection. Tho question of operational use by

Opo has been raised with the WH Division and it has bedn stated
that this oquipment, consisting of the press, linotype machine,
Speed Graphic cameras, etce, can be used for Ope propaganda pro»
duction purposes. \

3. Tho question of control of the contract agent was dis-
cussed and it has been determined that the General Counsel's Of~
fice is being requested to establish legal means whereby the lién
or mortgazs on this equipment will be held in the name of a cut-
out... In the event of any untoward action on the part of the con-
tract agent or disagreement between thé agent and CIA, action can
be taken to assumo control of the machinery.

. 4 As is indicated in the attached memorandum from the Chief,
WH Division, the contract agent is considered to be an individual
of high intelligence ond personal integrity. For this and the
abov® listed reasons, it is recommended that Amendment No. 1 to
PBGROVEL be approved in the amount of $8,000.

KL. « LI
Aoting/Assistent Director fi
Policy Coordination



--- Page 28 ---
: SECRET ot

ae

rn ee ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET ae

abuns sould by Uead in the "TO" colin, Under each comment a ling should be drawn across sheet
he "TO calvin Cach officer shows in tial (check mark insufficient)

be roturned to Regrstry.

spond with the number
tag and Kecord Sheet shou

and each comment numbere
before further routag Ths §

: TETSINET a: © coveantnt Palureca new
" .
i FORM NO. 51-10 SECRET



--- Page 29 ---
14-0000

ote ht AMG - .
SECRET ie
security bnfeernntion .
13 Judy 1952
2 .
MEMDSRANTUH FOR: Secretary, Project Review Comsittee : ..
SUSILCT 1 Project POGRIVEL, Anendmcnt Yo. 1

1. This will advise you that bop approved the above today in
the anowt of 23,000. ;
2. This sum is actually a lo tea principal agent at LS interest

ner annum, renayruant to bo effectuated in $990 monthly instaliments out
of the contract agent!s galary with the agencys which auoumts to $6,000

por annume :
3. The agent 4a-lecated in Santdago, Chile. Proser arrangenents

in connection with the above will be riade by CCC and the Gancral Counacl's
This matter was cleared with tho latter priae to mproval.

‘offices
HANS ¥, TFITE
” Aeting Chist of Plans :
Office cf DD/T
Wich
3 day 1952
eh Digus

Original & $3 Secretary, PRC

Leet Project Feldury ab/co .

lec: Misc. Projects Yoldor, DL/P

loss ER

Lect D/P Chrono :
2 ces oPc/er . en 8: -

SECRET

Lemwity tr formation



--- Page 30 ---
14-0000

S8-E-C-R-E-T
my

Se.

+:

SECURITY INFORMATION

p/P Projsot Agorovnl _Sheot
Projeot Cryptonym PHORCVEL
Aone

Amondment Noo 1

Sub-Projeot Cryptonym

Originating Division

WESTERE WENT S.

LIVISION

Approved ~- Disapproved

Comments

$)

S-E-C-R-z-T



--- Page 31 ---
14-0000

vet nie wee *

$-E=0-R-E-T

: : ” SECURITY INFORMATION

if ee :

‘ ue Project Gutling Clearance Sheet

\ : Project Title (Phe Amendrent No. 7 Project Now

Developed by: La g. Hou WHO/ er &l 23 Prax 1752

Case: Officer Organization Date

: . ; . Reviewed by: /\f) / i Z| 2g 19S .
io? . . ic ep Chief ° Z fe sion Ch Date
} .

: ~ 8 1 Goneurrences: KLE setters ‘4 pew [Po ~h wry Jose

é . Date
, en- ZZ. ecko k oy) jliee _ — Qe
: . : - Date
\
\ _ Date
H ~
: Date
Date

Aprroved subject to conditions below:

Conditions of approval:

OPC Form No. 1103 (Rev.)
23 April 1951

. ; GaE~CaR 2-7


--- Page 32 ---
14-0000

comin

’ Consurred: Psychological Warfare Officer WED

BECKET
Security infotmtion

Project Title Amendment No. Project No.

. ‘tat Following Line and Staff Cificers of tha western Hemisphere Division H.ve

Signed and Concurr With This Project.

Data
Political Warfare Officer MID_.-_
Date
Eeonomic Warfare Officer WHD. —_ .
7 Date
Sabotage Warfare Officer WIT : _ ae .
. ; " Date |
Countersabotage Officer WHD =

Date

Paramilitary Officer WHD :

Date

Plans Officer P* OWD

Date
AP ANAY CPE 2,

Budget Officer P * O WHD
Project Coordinator
Chief P & O WHD

Conditions of fonroval

SofsCoRsh-T
Security Information

<2 “pate
BD 4 ide $s


--- Page 33 ---
14-0000

SECRET

Same as Project FRICVEL, -—

II, PEFSTENCES

A. Sane as Project FIGROVEL.
B. Budgetary dats for this amend-ent (annex A).
t. Keno on neeting with Agent Paul D, LANGEVIN (Annex B).
. D, Cable to Santiago Station on the loan to LUIGETIN (Annex C),
TIT, PROPOSAL
A, Statement
1. tis prorosed that the Agency lend the sm of $8,000 in

. D, LAGE

U. S, currency, at £2© per annum, to contrsect agent, Paul
in Santieco, Chile, in oréer that this ayeut

--pPay meet cortractual obligations vitheut encangering his

present cover,

Tho rroceeds of this loan vould be used to complete ray~
ment on ry and equinment recently installed in the
Jeased pr e not the printing establishmer® of which
LANGEVIN is now sole’ proprietor.

The princirei end interest of the loan world tbe amortized
from the entire rroceeds of LANCEVIN's sslexy from the
agency of S6,00C rer year, at per month,

ne rate of 255

The loan would be guaranteed by oa chattel mortgage, or
whatever Jecel instrument is custorarily exmeved in
Chile to establish a lien on the assets mst which the
loan would be mede. . ce -

Details of the loan contract and selection of an apyro-
priate lege] instrument to secure a lien on the machinery
aint

and equipment would be arrived et through join’ agreement
of HD, CCC and the Legal Division, The extsting agent

SECRET


--- Page 34 ---
14-0000

SECRET

contract with IWNGSVIN vould aiso be revieved Jointly by
rejrogentatives ef these div © with a view to incor=
porzting ery rodifieati eh might be necessary as a
result of the agent's emtcring inte a loan ayreencnt with
the cgeney. .

_As a prerequisite to the iscuence of a loan, LANGEVIN

vould recuired to subrit a complete nare~plate inven-
tory of all inachinery and coutrrent involved in the loan
transection and its physical existence in his custody,
his title to the property, end an approximate evauleation .
of its worth would bo determined through WD station per=-
sonnel. 7, :

Background

Contract agent, Paul D. LANGEVIN, is the sole ovmer and editor
of the. English-language peper, South Pacific Mail, which is
published weekly in Santiago, Chile. The printing of this
publication wes formerly done by en cutside firm. Desiring to
handle both hie own printing recwlrements end to engage in job
printing, LANGEVII! obtained equipment from an individual who
xcpected to ke compensated through a nartnership in the busi-

ness,

Eowever, sexious illness hes prevented the rrespective

yertrer from centering the business, and hes forced LANGEVI! to
rect the financial ‘obligation alone, The renayment of this
obligation will recuire LANGEVIN either (1) to accept a Chilean
pertner in his business, or (2) to cbtain a loan. The require-
nents of ceevrity and the need for flexibility of omretion
militate against tringing in a partner. Moreover, a loan ob-
tained locally through ordinary corrercicl channels, i.e.
banks, vould enteil exorbitant Intcrest retes, In addition,
since a bank lean would slmost certeinly: be of short-tern
duration, there vould exist the constant threat of loss of the
cover business through a‘rossible refusal to renew the loan,

IALGEVIN has contacted a bank: in Texas in an attempt to secure
a loan, offering as security his charc of a family interest in

-Oll-producing lenés, It epnesrs doubtful that the Texas bank

wil grant the loan,

Current Status ,

LANGEVIN was advised, vhile in the United Stetes for training,
that Headguerters would investigate the possibilities of an

SECRET


--- Page 35 ---
14-0000

- SECRET

® tha Correr~

7 cable, ester

Tean crrancenents with-
It vas decided that

: eutlined in the propesel,

solution for the Arency from the standpoint

ve the Agency even

It is reerended thet the sun of $,0CO be mce,availeble es a loan,
-at 42 interest, to contract Sgent, Paul DL IANGEVIN, the loan to bo »
socureé rc Hien on mechinery tnd equirmont velued at. approximately
. $10,000; interest end yo pel to be anortised at the rate of $500
_per month, the full amount of agent's salary.

VI. BuDGS? Dama

Seo kenex A, (CFC FM No. 20a)

SECRET


--- Page 36 ---
14-00000

3

nn

Project Cryptonym ?3G20.21L

A,

B.

Cc.

SECRET

- PROTECT FINANCEAL DATA
{This data mry wot excucd SECRET classification)
t
Fiscal Period Covercd 1 June 195 2
through 30 June 195 2

\

iL. 5. Patton WED/CPC Sranch'1 thee,
Case Officer Responsiole Statf or Division

PERSONNEL REQUIREMENTS

(indicate number and type of persenne! required and estimated totel

compensation for salary, allowances, travel, and related employee
benefits. )

‘Type . Number——-—-- Estimated Total Compensation

Staff Employees
Staff Agents
Career Agents
Agents

None

_Consultants

Detaiied Personnel
Miscellaneous

TOTAL $_

SUPPLIES, MATERI- AND SPECIAL SERVICES
Cndicatze the type and e taated cost Of materials and special services
required to support the project, Attach a list of special equipment
requirements, if availiable, )

None

Total Estimated Cost $ °

OTHER OPERATIONAL EXPENSES

Undicate volume ana nature of such expenses, such as (1) maintenance

of two operational houses abroad, (2) hire of approximately 10 foreign

* nationals for procureriént of information, (3) spot purchase of

information, etc.)
None

Totai Estimated Cost $

OPC Form No, 464a
9 November 1950 SECRET


--- Page 37 ---
14-0000

a)

SECRET

D, SURSIDOY OP PROPRIETARY PAYMENTS

(ftunds are to b. turecd over to individuals er groups in large lurnp
sums to be expended by the individusls or groups at their disérction
to accomplish an agreed-upon objective, explain the type of financial
accounts, factual .verifteation, or etatemencs, ifaay, other than a
reccipt for the lump sumy which will be obtained from such individual
or group, } . \

. ‘The sum of {3,000.00 is to be paid to contract agent Paul D. LANGEVIN

: in the form of a loan at 4é interest, both interest and principal to

- be anfortized at the rate of $500.00 per month. The loan will be

evidenced by a loan contract ‘signed by LiNGEVIN and the agency.

Total Estimated Cost $ 8,000.00
\
E, FUNDING REQUIREMENTS
(Show approximate dates funds will be required, if known, and indicate
whether funds will be required in U, S, collars, specific types of for-
eign currency, checks, bonds, gold, or some special type of nego-
tiable instrument, Indicate any special security requirements or
special methods of transmission anticipated in connection with funding
the activity. }

The above amount (US{8,000.00) shall be paid in a lump sun to the
borrower,-preferably by check deposited in the Chemical Senk and Trust,
7Ath Street lard Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y., on or about 20 June 1952.

F, SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
(Within security limitations, list any other facts or circumstances
which will enable Special Support Staff to lend adequate logistic sup-
port to this project. Indicate specifically the "Rush" or "Time"
factors involved, ) .

Full anount must be paid on or about 20 June 1952

.G, Funds required for use in Ficld $ 8,000.00
. Funds required for use Ly Hq. $ ’
Total (this amount is also tctal of —
A, B, C, and D above)

a) OPC Form No, 404a -2-
° 9 November 1950

SECRET



--- Page 38 ---
.- “SECRET

(PROJECT FINANCIAL DATA
(This data may “not exceed SECRET Uiassifies stion)

sy fo: Pore
oF Project Cryptonym Fiscvl Period Covered vane 195
throng 30 Tune ne 195 2

us 'y Hatton Resi pene
Case Officer Responsible Staff or Division '

A, ‘PERSONNEL REQUIREMENTS
(indicate number and type of personnel required and estimated total
compensation for salary, allowances, travel, and related employee
benefits.)

Type Number Estimated Total Compensation ,
: Staff Employees — as

‘ Staff Agents

i : Career Agents
Agents
Consultants :
: -Detaiied Personnel - . wee . ,
Miscellaneous: . ‘

: TOTAL $

cane

B, SUPPLIES, MATERIALS, EQUIPMENT, AND SPECIAL” SERVICES
the type and esti:nated cost of materials and special seivices
required to support the project, Attach a list of special equipment
requirements, if available, ) . ,

Nae i

Total Estimated Cost $

Cc. OTHER OPERATIONAL EXPENSES
(indicate volume and nature of such expenses, such as (1) maintenance

of two opcraticnal houses abroad, (2) hire of approximately 10 foreign
Foo nationals for procurement of information, (3) spot purchase of
Ce information, ete.) .
i w.6 Rona

Sead Total Estimated Cost $

OPC Form No, 404a
9 November 1950 SECRET



--- Page 39 ---
14-0000

oaey atzee

pate ke Pear ec Ree

ECRET '

_D, SUBSIDY OP PRO
Uttunds ure tab
. -sums to be expended by cht ind viduals or groups at their discretion
LN . 4 wie
to accomplish an agreedvupon objective, explain the type of financial
gecounts, factual verification, or atatemants, ifany, other than a
receipt for the lump sum, which will be obtained from such individual
or group. )

ere

‘
PCAN Be fo tae gah? to tan Web ager ‘ Pr mereen £2
® Poth 3. a Lean o% Ae iatonpety tests fal. apest and apine tat t
BO Mar PELE BS AG Bit ol . Too hon. WLLL Se.
aviaenad by J Jesa ante seb slaget yy i rBland the agartye

Total Estimated Cost $ # Oe)

_E. FUNDING REQUIREMENTS :

(Show approximate dates funds will be required, if known, and indicate
whether funds will be required in U. S. dollars, specific types.offor- -
eign currency, checks, bonds, gold, or some spécial type of nego-
tiable instrument, Indicate any special security requirements or
special methods of transmission anticipated in connection with funding
the activity.) an -

a tow

at:

i rr) Dott 2} ALL bo ged tn a Suen remiss
ht a chen deneshh the shemjeal leek &

1 emwed and Kachere year, ca Terk, eles a er About Ht S

Tre atuce ns

- §

oe

F, SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
. (Within security limitations, list any other facts or circumstances
which will enable Special Support Staff to lend adequate logistic sup-
port to this project, Indicate specifically the "Rush" or "Time"
factors involved, )

Yuh avaanh suet tee paid ae ge aseed 20 Juoe 2752

1

G. Funds required for use in Field $ 8,000
Funds required for use by Hq. $
‘Total (this amount is also total of
A, B, C, and D above)

1

OPC Form No, 404a ~2-

= :
ad 9 November ; 1950

SECRET



--- Page 40 ---
14-0000

we mee wee teen eee .

; Solos Sentiege

\ Barch G, 16o8
i ‘

\ sgtaanr as)

: Doar Sires

| Berieg a reecs vicki to the Caited Ststoe, 3 tad tho eppure

i

tunity of mpooking sith o , cutlemaa cho gevo ao the emme of pour
organisation a3 eae chich, in sortain eases, wae eble te egsperate:
ith intermatiensl antlottaliterian groupe

|

i In Sen tls o, gure nme oxiete, there te a asall bead of

! . ‘people who ars enthuclsstioally daterestsd in laurahing oush a

i grou, olth prticuiar isteyest in tho rorivel of "Per Galle”, o

| wookly vewmag-aino ones printed here. .This pudlicaticn eas doo

} voted to tno lower alogpea end od terlally fought aginst Commies.
A Wrge grou, of lusal businvdomes contributed to ito susesss tith

| thoip baocia, and su? orte @ .roup ebish could bo celled upea agains

7

j

Tho dlrestur of tre juoligatica,. +@ disco
i tin julened jourvaltot, is evallavls to carry a “enaa errr agadn, ag
, ubfortasately dues a t have the negoascary finaneisl beakiag. Gould
! it 30 too quoh ty dyv-e thet your orsanisat’ a might holy in thie
i gatter? A sun of evout 360,000 Jollars aysar mould bo required to
: {noure success, P15 a:gunt roughly popromate tho yoarly lose of
: the prev ous 2 olleation, plus d cortais sansideration (or Angroaged
io dusto, All otter melo ox enzes would, of course, 09 aot Proa adore
tioing and olroulation Fevenua ae

i ‘ myeolf, aad other faterested fviends oro -regering .
: a dotailos Pep wt on the expoasea aentisacd above, indisatan, besa
{ Quen woneys would be weed, end sith eka ompested romlio, Es would

- ba happy te osna tula royort to you 1¢ you indisato ony posaidle
Support of cur idea,

Ploase far,ive tho taguencsa of Gnda Fogsed, Bid 08 We ere aot
pure to wants extent your oseparation $e poesibie, wo avait further
word froa FOR.

Stescpaly yore,
(Funk BPIRL)

a

e . may .

Lied idk 80 tae PP I pay we te



--- Page 41 ---
14-0000

April 0, 108

doourpreaty :
Doar Sirs

Thie is to aoinvel edyq altn Ghenke revaip® of your lotter of
saroh 6, 1463. Tho oxesutive board of cur feundativa has reed ‘esd
cons. dered your proposal anda wo find your contenple ted adtivities
moot intorestin,. Your idsa of reviving m mti-tetaliterica nasde
198100 o9enoa a hizhly vesiradle cotivity off: unioh to initiate
your groj’s activitios, Our foundatica, ao yeu xsve been told, fo”
wore than villian, to sasiet acoredited grouyo such ao yours in dovele
vping end carrying forward a genuine oatietotal {tar ian progres.

Ghile ao ere scat tatereeted iu seela, your group ousecee Nally
leunohod tno Powmation’e su ‘pur B of ite aotivitio. would of courcs
be voatia.cat u,va roeelpt of as oaaplete details os psssible oa the
porovanel, rons aces, aii alas of your grou, ond the board'e Sopre-
val of tne sroup!a” objostives esd wogren.

m ta wider. tat the boa cay “arrive at dofinite conolusiuns sone
deriing aay osatstengo a .ob it .$,ht vo able ‘to vovide, ve roquest
thet you furnish the “ollow.s, dn ormations

0. Subalt a revert, as you sugzeot, settin, forth your
pbns .or revival £ the 28, 0aine and ino ude iis furnotion
M s0.F rae airoeo and the e.ount of assistance waloh you
doulas eis. tie Foundation ty ‘suvply.

be. Lnfor. us e4 tu onethor your group 16, or sould bo,
ina you'tian to forw.late a prugros of additional anti-
Camu.l t activition, Go would like all oasiele fafors
satin inoludin, on estinate of ,robable oust, |

e. Siace your group ia very evidently couposed of ine
-lueatial and high-aindod poople such .6 .oursel f, go
believe tust Lt ight have tho eapacilit, of eveztual ly
doy lopla, inte en organiasticn ahich could wl! boome
tho focal poiat Jor antt-Cemunics activities throughout

Chile asd aight bo the vehiele through whiok aid sould bo
chennelles te other wortay olvie, seolal, busiaese oF re-
ligious orgenisstivog which als» aay be awore »f tho Came
unlet mensce aod wifob say cioh ¢o acabat 1%. agtivoly.
Your views oenserning avg @ peasibility oo .ld bo goleanad
by us.

ad. Ia oder to furthor the wera of your group, will 18
be posaidble togtain fimncl 2 ea istuace losally fren

business, sogfal and civic organisational Sueh ouppors
fo obtaiaod in .suy inatances, hu other ccuntrics, by
ro utacle organizat ons eageged in offorts aiallar to
thoes wilon you nave eabarred up ca.

ihe

|
H

STE ke a

PP



--- Page 42 ---
14-0000

ve ence oe
{
3.5. * poe | |
| in |
| | “4
‘ ~ | |
,
i
. { ; |
[4
| Q H
\- ae fa camolusica, cay wo recaphaslse cur great La in yew |
oy su,gosted ~dilcat m, Ha chall be nocd Raypy to revelve on carly :
: + tnswor wich ehll pomit ,roxpt considera! tan of posainle ou
t for tals emioavar. * oe
- ee ere ;
. : co ; Vary tray puro,
. Cat edgrasy
. * :
|
4
‘ ‘ ‘
e ;
; sod,
;
Lee oe a a eeepc A |
aeleeeee + ; |
_ my |
Ay ; |
nod |
no |
: . |
. t
a
a og uh '
“ | +
} fs ys . |
io.
—— -
ee

a


--- Page 43 ---
14-0000

i
i
1
|
$
i
;
i

=
Hq

‘are t. revive the Yi P2598, eadlota .
- else, It Gali-be “¢iuted on Phuraday a Ptoravgn geil bo; di apatéhod: by

bd. “Infors {vosst t.ity.o }
sons ota.”, fis usliening of ew:

Aprid wy, ls

Reo'd tay 26, 133
\ .

OTHABAS
baer
\

Thee yea for your letter of April Oth, 1035. I em cure you vill

; it the ‘éelay lo cnoworing has boca duo to ay offerte to
the Lnforastica nested foro detailed Feoponse te your’ quoetians,
f have had several conversations with doa , Go oditor

of the bust eetien wo wisa to revive, ag wall a9 other, Interested partios, |

aie t. We vorth (sitrate aad ov, 20r arses) and by railito the Bouth
(oval sinin an. tertile fact ri! Thus tho Yoview woul: be cold as
worcere Lott tuetf fmoturlos.:1 woereend, imuring Seturday aad
Sdny r@erin’ ier tie fee lye Our. edjooitve te to roach a: playoee and

“ marsere | ortor to fore a naoe o-nestvaoe. deay industriel] concorna
would puroiasea the wustiont ot Mrresalo to eaviayees at a lever goat,

An oan oles jurin, tee corisua nblisativa period tie Cartonifera Lota
(Lote Goel vin jon ) wegen ulth @ surcoriveion of 40 copfoa. Thad
nuver, toes. od tne reeders, saa wiorly inoreaced to 1,899..
Tue +d be backed uj the organisation "Pros
pre “een r to ro-vetablion this group wouls be:
avo.t tiv to two ands tal! 412,um poses, Cr tat gaount one SUL fo,
Petes woul om raise: Yoselly, roa thea olu socloty and ony now sourass
we dene. That woult seen ou would bo @alled Uren to cusport our

cro. tutie exteat 9 ane or ous qd half uillio. .e0us (or a atataus
Perivt uf ow yeoor.

+. .addi tlonel anti Gea: suntot agtivitios
¥ rou0pager would no 19 often’
of our coups activities, [ quote vor.atia fro the ideate oxpresced

in tha le,all; inourporated erganigatios in- 19479

“The objeot of the sveldty will bo the exploitation of
nevepayers, radio and ether asenc of srapegsada doatined
peinoipatly at tho dsfease of ow Pogiag of coastituttonal
descorcay end our covered yaty against tho Horais®= forecs,
‘Bovie® casualca, and easother form of totalitarianian.
In ite nowopaper, publicationa and other moans of propa.
Gann the ccaiety vill atir tne patriotian of tho oitiscae
end show to the sublia ousselemso the tragto raality of tes”
Ser fot resize; 4% alll fight fe. olen govortment and to
betterment of the sorting glagees ca the basis ef tho eorredt
s -pliost oa of sesiadl lows and soadiéicas, The Sesioty vil

ie

eo om nena hn ee et ee caine eh ee ce a at na ee

vole

ny a oe



--- Page 44 ---
Tatar oe

utilisa for ite endo ll yak aowode of tho exprosaion of
ideas and principally 1¢ aill editer reviews, beets, paaghe
Jota, hsaddil.s end poster. and will scro el} kinds of pubde
Moations, radio broadcasts end prooties of Mine. th
eoolety will aleo ive aid te oll groupe or orgenisetions
with sintl»r aiss cad W113 utilise all tho masa of tiought
nocevcars by tho board of DMtireeters in order to cerry cut
“ite ideate®.

(ane ones wlisg). of 014 to. otter vorthy civic, “gootsl,
busines’ or Ol gloisorganisations....". Baturally, our group would
bo dolightes “ts ald atnere (eee shove). . Set

*,...mill At be osslcle to. obtain Moenotal assistance looel 1y!*
enent timd it is lapossinle’to sey definitely io aaah fimise —
jtence could be obtained bere. But it to interestia, to soto

1 firut asortded for the inear oration. of ‘tre old exccgiation

wee $690,000 pesos. Thio sus was also.t doucled fros opedtaseoud dona=

tuna, et:., cane the group had” bosmme 4 reality.

t bape the avore will De euffts tent for the present, Re aro pre
sently waiting a dvtalled ostia to of printizg costs for "Por Chilo”
and atwi; fa, the probiens “{nvalvede-a serioua chortage ot. paper, for
fieta.ae. But { ud.cetly fool that thie urgenisation ead its offieial |
orpen “Sor Chilo”, plu a eaall nuaper of younger poople e.e ore inter-
ested in fighting Comiuntsa, vagiid De tha firs beginain, of a great
work ia tte aountry, thioh sight saes dsy spread throuhout Latin Asorian.

an Bicorely end oordiatly, coe

(FONE BRR)

ster ae



--- Page 45 ---
14-00000 j >

_ dune 17, 953- ae :

SF UMEBR he) ‘ . :
Bear 3irs

. j
: t
‘Pais 1a to aeknovledgs with thangs Fecofpt of }
your informative latter of April 27, 1753 which arrived :
by steerer mail, Wo resret thet an cariier reply haa |
riot: bedn possiblé, but. tha tine elapsed has been woll 3. = 0d.
. spant-tn- 2 vine your latest report and: your proposal: - sop.
of March %,°1953, the serious coneideration whieb. . a
they donérve, We aicht surgest that: your future correse
pondeace be sent: to ua by airneil, - .

. The “exoentive: beeee of che Foundatten J
“ your poport ‘Of April 29, 1953 and appreciated youz: -
o raspense ft our request for further ins

would rarit-carar a ¢ snalderetion ef Clnanctsl ase:
tance ay yeu have. inttcated would de necessary, —

Aa. sbrva “indicated, yeur provosal of “arch 5,
onl resort of Avril 27, & ave met witr tne synvethetio
Intacsst sit In tre. rorntation: of particular interest
ara tha tadiceticna af steens. local sv cpost in the ett ls
paot, as avidsnac 04 re tae S09, 999 peco inittol Incare so
heretion gvo8 an aircst agua) enaint in .
‘w.eequent- ho i "P. F.0.%} orvantzetion, —. !
Novevar, we Woula V ka.to know to whe’ oxtert the

Lh7 fieures, which you efted in your letier of April
b, might serve as 9 realistic baaia ror a 1955
aatinatce of. aupport Wan mieht be obtained nocally. - !

Yf, in the light of infomation at hand end
any. addi tional inigeiation which you aay furntah on
the perscnnat, Pesourcas, and needs of yooR grovp, ,
your - “proposal hould prove to constithite tho 'Poaaible é
ond desireble tivity ehieh it now appeara to co, wo *
will eandosvor'to lend ovr sunport te you in every
way posstt las 27 . co

cee *

ibe

frome a definttive dnawor to your proposal until wo
are in recelot of, ond have reviaved, your promised
eatimate of printiae costa for OP .6." Bf

4 Vary truly youre,

1

(DTA 4SEEASY

!
eye lanes ang df ecb mrt 46 tartan reet

“Phe Fowsdation wil ist te in a -posttion too bee ween eee


--- Page 46 ---
14-0000

ot Toe slapseget tie

! er BAS)

“thins 40 fe a graphic azsxple of ttc Bind of west our. grow om do. : “net

tion ap our paat letter,’ . |

Tre pespilst, for lastanco, originsted frog thy studerts tavolved and vos

tence nme ect oe ee seen met cnn ceneepentemnenatentir SO eR gee ha ggeeene the ame,

a
"Then you very exch for pour letter of dana 16a, 195), exloiniag x
that ye ere sil comet Cor ing tho poseibAlity of oid for: CF GOD. . i
wont to-spologise for the error shich resulted $0 ay lost , 4
, “eaa-anih. or Conures all @stero correepentence vill-be h

2

Se eee a

‘to nile's Netvaralts "otsddate tn ection Yalporaies eed Csacepetea,

for the project vere raissd by "Por Chile*. :
Mo are hoping to cond you nore complete éstetls ot the oarlicet poocibla.
foment, . 0
(depend 7). baw
“In spite of the loa] eanoaic eysten vo foo) thst wo can/en gach eupport
Totally for amy quah project of the group, and wil} re-sffire posible éapitelias-

oon

oe

a
2

there, ts cy ) question “that there doa “great deal of wert to te tone hore.

produ ved with our aid, Ee

. Heping thet wa may hear from you axon egoin. Bogarde, ead thache for
your interest.

sete Sarat sgh
ve

a , a» Bory truly pours,
ah (Fumexiar)

See eee fo

;

i ae a ean

aa

re ee 1
i
. é % mm |

yn ;

if he we rn : i

ae ——- if
* $ B _



--- Page 47 ---
14-00000

1.

3.

Chief of Mission, Santiago
Chief, WUD
KUGOWN Matters

FURIOSO-C

' REFESEXCES: (a) HCSA-4343 (b) S4GO-848; (¢) DIR 16626; (a) DIR 17648

This is to confirm and amplify reference (ad), that Headquarters has
Frepared the initial Jetter from DIHA3EAS to Martin J. COKEXIAS., This
letter, which recuests CC 1AS to act as the "honorary"® DTHAEEZAS rep-

resentative in Chile, is ceing sent air-mail to the CCns!IAS residence in
Santiago.

As an attachment to this dispatch ve are roritrding the draft of a
suggested reply to he sent by COsri TAS to DTWAGEAS, via air mail. COKENIAS
need not use our suggested ter verbetim, as long as he does incorporate
in his reply the ideas contained in our draft.

Unon receipt of the Jetter of acceptance fron C
send COL=vIAS a letier of introduction to ¥ ialAS will also,
at the same time, alert Fi o the anticipited contact, asking him
to put CCrENIAS in touch with RIAL-1,

For security reisons ver are not enclosing conics of the ini
Jetter to C 445, It is suggested that station make its o
of the letters sent directly to CO\SLIAS, .

iI

Sile cories

S will naturally
RIAL relationship to
ough his: own co. rondence

dn his contacts with FUNES! 1
not disclose a yreuter Imoviledze
date than wold logically he available to hin
In order to facilitate underst:
» however, the next Jetter f
= addition to the letter of
AS correspondence to date.
corres:onderce is already available to 6 AS, since corics were pouched

vith ECSW-274, but it is telieved that C 2S vill be in a firmer resition
vis-a-vis PUNDSHIAL if he car. produce his own copies of such corresvondence,
@irect from PTEAMZAS.

rom
odt:ction, copies of the
uarters reclizes that this

6. Since OTHADEAS/

Cc, KING NDF. HCIEAN, JR.
DC/ER I/WE

SECRET



--- Page 48 ---
1400000

6. Since DTHATSAS has written to CUAE'IAS on the

accusintance", it row becomes inperstive for ©
FAS and certain of its person-el, : Headcu
NIAS' crasent knowledge of DTHA. EAS, in

OTE
like to know the extent of C

HCSW 345
page 2

3 of a "previous
AS to be briefed or
ters woulc therefore

ordcer that ve may supply him with whatever background information he may
need to be convincing in his role as an old friend of a DTHAFEAS director.

7. Headcuarters wil] forvard comments requested in paregrarh 4 of ECSA-409
subsectent to the actual introduction of COKE.14S into the FURIOSO-C

picture.

Attachment: :
Draft of suggested
to DTHAPEAS
31 August 1953

reply of COKENIAS

Distritution:
3 - Santiago
2 - WH/ER.LI
1 = VE/ail Room
1 - RI

WHD/LVEbert/aw

J, CG. KING
CWH


--- Page 49 ---
14-0000

7
i
j
to accent, Mo
7 . You wore enttrely correct in ssouniig. thot I have asintained en active
H

Dear me

I have -recoived and coackdered your Mind letter ef
oteceraly Mattored that yoo should bo bo willing $0 pleee GK Galas ia
‘wa. 1 wuld be preed to ecirvs oa om Chonerery” reproseatative of the Founda
Rion, and vending reeoipt of the nscosesry further detaile, ZT will be happy

inverest.in the quod vor’ of tho Poudetion. In fact, ny interest, rather
than diatniehing sines I loft: the U, 8, hes greatly incruased in visw of
Ry obsorvationa an4 experienosa here in Chilo. There is a creat neod down |

"sre for Just guch ectivities ae you have rantioned in your letter, aad I \

would voleome an opportunity suchas you have proscnted, wheredy lea
wo, contripate to the. Foundation's procrer. of asaistence,

ee © conclusion i “pay 1 say thet I shall look foruard to mesting and vorte
ding with FUND: SHIAL ond PUXEPHIAL-1 as soon ag you can feraish ne with the
Asters of introduction to theea gentlemen. I a-reo that the task at hand
is net ono to be meags.red in terme of salary, and i thall consider the
° . satisfsction | axmect to derive frea thie work as ample renuserstioa.

“Thanking you agai: for your expression of confidence in ae, I a

| : . . ‘Very truly yours,

eaten eee cae enn et etree

ty
me
Boe
|

}
H
t

te Ba a canes, . _ : 7
ss fj EN ES OG weenie. Se



--- Page 50 ---
&
Q

e
me

October 6, 1953,

Dear FUNESRIALs

It is ny privilere, by means of this letter, to introduce to you
my good friend, Mr. COKENIAS, who has recently, and very graciously,
consented to act as the Foundation's personsl representative in Chile.

I have taken the liberty of askins Is. COKENIAS to serve in this
capacity prirarily because the statutes of a> Foundation require that ve
seek the services of a U.S, citizen to represent us in any foreign country —
in which ore or more Foundation grants nay be cperative. In addition, hovever, ’~
I earnestly believe this arrangement will serve to strengthen the very pracising
relationship already established between us ami to stimulate those activities
which are of mutual interest to us, I had nct mentioned this stipulation in
our previous correspondence, but I do so row iz view of the possiblé imminence
of a formal agreerent between Propapands Po> Gile and the Foundation, Our
receipt of your promised printing cost estizstes would pave the way for approval
and detaiicd planning of an actuel grant of assistance,

It is my hope and expectation that i>, COXENTAS will call uron you in
the near future to present his respects an¢d ors, As our representative he is
authorized and prepared to discuss o11 ratters of mutual concern, Mr. COR@ILAS
has been instructed to extend to you, to Sr. (to whom, I trust, you
will introduce Mr, COKENTAS) » and to your grocp as a whole, every possible courtesy
ané assistance, It is ry sincore desire thet this personel contact will prove
to be ef cormon benefit,

' Enclosed you will find a copy of -y letter of this date, to li, CORSNTAS,
ab the sane tine, r am sending Hr, COKENIAS a copy of this letter to you, as well
as copies cf our previous correspondence, so thet he may familiarize himself with
developrents to date,

Trusting that you and Sr. will receive Mr, COKENIAS as our
representative in the sane spirit with which nas‘offered to serve, and hoping
that this arrangement will mark the beginning cf a worthwhile and enduring
association, I renain,

Very cordially yours,

ees COKENIAS



--- Page 51 ---
14-0000

. * Santiago, 31 de Octubre de 1953

Thy apreciado senor 3 . ot

He tenido el placer de conocer al Senor COKENIAS, E51 mo ha
‘ ; _ dicho que no es necesario que mis certas sean escritas en ingles, lo que
a 0 fecilitara nuestra correspordencia pves mis conocirientos de la lengua .
. to. ’ ..anglesa son tan rudimentarios que te vela precisado-cada ves, a buscar - :
ww amigo anoricano,. de buena volunted y corfianza, que me. tredujera las oan
cartas que le‘he.estado enviando, - Achaques de salud hand contribuido a no
- responder oportunamente, como hubiera sido.mi deseo, sus cartas.

Ya estamos en contacto con el Senor y esperamos
llegar muy lvego a un éritendimi ento para proseguir con nuestro proyecto
de reéditar el periodico, "Por Chile",

Fl senwr COKENIAS le enviara muy pronto un resumen de lo que a
astanos acordando, :

Se despide my afectuosazente » 5.8. .
‘ . '

FUNEERIAL : ,

1 .
(Above letter by FUNEBRIAL acknowledges that he has been introduced to :
CCKENIAS and that the latter will send to DTHABEAS shortly a resume of . : -
the PPC plans.) re ; _ a ot _



--- Page 52 ---
14-0000

r
7

zim

Teele als DT

Lratock Ougling Gleareneg Shack

' Project Mtl FURTOSC ¢ (PEGA ee 2OEIebencs mont No. Project No.

Dovoloped by LEGS tne SA A
Orgen! “Organ! sation

- axfefi _¢ ah sy
ision ly

Case Offiser

S-E-CoR-E-P

anand new 2, te OEM, oy)

of a pvovals
. x “ steel wt aul D0"


--- Page 53 ---
Selene?
Seeurity inferratioa

fy ;
(PSCROVEL)
Projoot Title FURICCC C_ _Amendmant No. 2 _. Project No, we

Te following Ling and Staff Officers of :he Weatern Hemisphore Divisicn have
ai.gned ard ccneurr with this project. .

Ccnourreds Psychological Warfare Officer mo Navid (, Enns, 185 22

Tate
Economic Warfare Officer WHD.
Date
Ssbotege Warfare Officer WHD.
Date
Countorsabdota e Officer WAD__.
, . Date
. ~ . co
Poramilitary Officer WD
. Date
Later Officer YD,
. Date
Jeginties Officer WHD.
Date

Budget Officer FeO WHD.

Plans Officer P&O wo___

Projest Coordinator fi

Chief, F&O THO

Conditiona of Approval,

re rareces

SeEoCeReve?


--- Page 54 ---
14-0000

ay A

PROJECT CUTLINE

Projects FURTOSO-C (PFCRCVEL) drendnent Ne,2,

Types Operational

X, AUTECIZATION

Basic Program Authorization

1, Basic project PBGROVSL was approved on 12 February __
1952 for the establishment of a mechanism cepable of comlucting
KUGOWN activities aimed at the accorplishment of WHD nissias
(a) and (b) in Chile; as set ovt in Section It (paragraph 2 b)

ar Annex B to the WHD/KUGOWN Strategic Plan dated 1 Novenber
1951, This task was assigned priority one in Phase I (i Jan, - ~

30 June 1952) in the aforenentioned plan. Funds in the ancunt
of 4,700.00 were allotted to this Project, to provide salary
for contract agent Paul D, LANGSVIN (FULMINATOR-1) for the
remainder af FY 52, to cover the cost of bringing him to PRFRIMS
for a period of covert trainins, provide his per diem allowance
while here, and to transport hin back to Santiego, Chile,
following complotion of training, 200

2, Amendment No.1 to besic project PSGROVEL was apgroved
on 14 July 1952 for the amount of $8,000 (later reduced to % 000)
to be made available as 2 lean, at 4% interest, to contract agent
Paul D. LANGEVIN; the loan to be secured by a lien on machinery
and equipment Velued at apprexinstely $10,000; interest and
principal to be auortized at the rate of | $500. per month, the fll
snount of the agent's salary, Arthorization for PRGROVEL Anerd-
ment No.l was the sane as that for the basic project PBGROVEL,

3, Tho. 1954 WH Operational Program, approved by Chief,
KUBARK on 10 August 1953, authorized a maximum expenditure of
$10,000 for this project during FY 1954.

fOr sermon


--- Page 55 ---
eer

14-0000 se sae
tT : ae ato

It

A. Sike as for basic Project PEGROVEL
B. Budgetary data for this amendment (Annex A)
C. DTHABEAS —-FUNEERIAL correspondence (Annex B)

| : D. HOS-W-345, with attachmont (Annex 6)
t

ore

meus

Security infa
y

wi

a


--- Page 56 ---
Id, THE Proposal, “
A, Stateront of the Propos

Nl, In bese orojent PRGROVEL, it was proposed to
undertake the development in Guile of a group or-comittea _
couposed af Gillean nationals which would engage overtly ant
actively in anti-BGGYPSY erforts ané would function as a WD
rechanisn for the acco:glishment of WHD missions (a) and (b)  *
aforementioned, As tho first step in iuplerenting the develop-
-rent of the committee, it was proposed to engage tho services
ef a PBPRIMS rational in Chile es a contract agent whose task
was to select, and exercise subtle guidance over a qualified
Chilean, the latter to act as the organizer of the committee,
It was further stated thet at such tine as development of the

° committee werrants, the necessary steps would be taken to
- place the committee in the prcper relationship with the
.. DIHABEAS foundation for purposes of cover and support, ‘The -
2 provisions of the foregoing are now revised in accordance with
the proposal of this amendment as set out below, The overall
objective of the basic project remains unaltored, .

: 2. It is proposed, in this Anendment No.2 to Basic

. Project PSGROVEL, that WD furnish teclmical and financial

"support, not te exceed $.0,000 during Fiscal Yoar 1954, to a
indigonous grew of Chileans for the purpose of aiding the
group in its overt anti-BGGYPSY and anti-BIGHT KUGOWN-type
activities, WD suppert will be specifically designed to assist
in the re-ectivation of the group along its criginal lines and
to foster by support periodically advanced, the revival of the
group's official organ, a weekly news nagasine, It is antici-~
pated that the indigenous group will evontually also serve as
a mechanism for the channeling of WHD support toe other worthy
groups with sixilar aims, (Seo Annex C),

B. Background

1. In 1947, a greup of inflvential Chilean business and
intellectual leaders formed a legally chartered organization
dedicated to en overt and active anti-BGGYPSY and anti-BICHT
program throug: use of all types of KUGOWN media, The group -

‘ published. an exti-BGGYPSY weekly news magazine designed for

‘ the working class audience, Tho activities of this group,

. uO including publication of its official organ, were later

* saspended as a result of financial difficulties, public solici-
tation and subscriptions being, at the tine, the only source of
funds,

2. Threzgh the encouragenent and subtle direction by



--- Page 57 ---
14-0000

cs

Fd

c.

Hission Santiago, working through contract agent Paul D,
LANGEVIN, FUNESRIAL, an unwitting Chilean with excellent
contacts in business and intellectual circles, has succceded
in ro-activating the forrar orgonization, and has recontly
approached DIHAHSAS with a request, for svpport for the group's
activitios, ~ .

Current Statug

1. The provisions of basic project PDGROVEL and of-
Anondment No.l have been fulfilled. Contract. agent Paul D,

* LANGEVIN has accomplished his mission, that -of selecting ani

subtly guiding a Chilean citizen as the indigenous organiser

of the committee, The loan to LANGEVIN, provided under tho
torms of Anendment Ho.1, has been paid in full, and the services
of the contract agent, for this ; Projects were terminated as of
31 August 1953,

2. The present committee, composed of influential Chilean
citizens, has been in touch with the DIHAREAS foundation since
Navch, 1953, The initial contact and subsequont correspondence
with DTHABEAS have been handled by FUNEARIAL, who, while not
a menbor of the original (1947) group, is an outotandirg
caricaturist and satirist with abundant experience In
jownalisn and publishiag, and vho has taken the initiative
in re-forming tho ence-active committee,

3.. DTHABEAS is currently awaiting receipt, fran FUNESRIAL,
of a detailed estimate of financial support needed, to include
printing costs of the group's woekly news magazine, The
publication itself will be published and edited by FUNEBRIAL-I,
a dynanic anti-BCGYPSY individual. who also published the
official orgen of the 1947 organization, Upon receipt of the
aboverentioned estimates, and pending thoix review and approval
by WHD, DTHABEAS should be prepared to extend technical and
financial support up to the amount of $10,000 per annun, It
is understucd that such WHD support, channeled through DTHABEAS
will supplerent at least an oqual amount which is to be raised
local. ty by the FUNESRIAL committee,

he ‘Contract agent Paul D, LANGEVIN has been replaced,
as the cut-out ané'principal agent for WHD, by Steff Agent
Inrtin J, COKENIAS, The latter is presently being introduced
into the operation as the Chilean representative of the
DTHABEAS foundation; this is heing done by means of corres-
pondence between DIHASEAS, FYNEERIAL, and Martin J. COKENTAS,
Once WD ‘support to the FUKERRIAL group is actually extended
by DTUABEAS, COKENIAS, ‘through the exercise of subtle guidance
made possible by his capacity as a DTHABEAS representative,



--- Page 58 ---
tev

WLLE cacit at least Indirect control over the activities
of the ererp. .

Adventazes to be derived by KUGOUY
1, 5y supvorting the activitios of the FUNESRIAL

erganizaticn, WD will obtein the services of a secure :
mechanis: wnvitting of ODYOKE interost, capable of conducting

extonsive KCQWN activities on an overt and indiganous basis,
2. In addition to execution of its own KUGONN type
progrem, the FUNSBRIAL group will serve as the focal point for
funding ané direction of other KUGOWN activities carried on by
other indigenous groups having similar aims, By extension of
support to other such groups, the FUNEBRIAL orgmiszsation could
thus becom the nucleus of a secure KUGOWN network, requiring
no direct contact by . WHD/KUGOWN personnel under ACID cover,

3. Since this operation would be funded by WHD headp
quarters, through the WHD mechanism DTHAZEAS, and since control
will be exercised by DIHARSAS through its Staff Agent represen-
tative in Chile, Mission Santiago will be relieved of all but a
monitoring emi reporting responsibility. This is in accordance .
with the Wi plan of removing direct control of, and attribution
for, KUGOWN operations from the official station,

Risks Involved

Risks involved in establishing the KUGQWN channols
envisaged in this project should be minimsl, The indigenous
indivicuzls concerned have been recruited on an unwitting
basis and willbe handled by Martin J. CCKENIAS directly, Tho

‘FUNEERIAL group, as an existing legal entity, has gocd natural

cover ‘and csn accept direct attribution for its KUGQIN acti~
vities, No Station personnel will be involved ani the possibi-
lity of ‘QDYCZS interest being disclosed wil] be fixther mini-
mized by securely funding tho group and backstopping both
Martin J. CCREtIAS and the group's activities by DTHABBAS,
FUNESRIAL wil be unwitting of the original source of his
funds ang of ~ ODYOKE interest,



--- Page 59 ---
14-0000

em
vy,

yt
fH

7 Security

-10-

TI PEG ENDATION
That the tunds currently approved for this project under
the WD Oporational Plan Sor FY 1954 in the ancunt of $10,000
be authorised for the implerentation of the propesal outlined in
this acendment, This support is not to axcced 3,000 during the
remainder of FY 1954, Funds used in furthering the revised plans
for this project will be provided periodically to the DTHADSAS
funding mechanism after receipt of statomonts from FUMEERIAL as
to the proposed use of the nonies,



--- Page 60 ---
14-0000

”

i
i
! ~o
|
|
'

-  Y. CPSRATICHAL, OUTLINE
Aa, Aros of Operation :

1. Gcographic eres
e) Chile

2. Specific target groups
a) Business and intellectual circles
b) Working class reader audience

B. Qverational Contre)
1, Control exercised by Headquarter

VWHD/KUGGIN will exercise operational control through
DMIABEAS which will disburse funds to the FUNEDRIAL group
Lee in accordance with specific WHD instructions, Control
se will be effected through the sLlotrent of funds on the
bacis of budgeted need, through DIMASEAS, to the FUNERRIAL
group upon evidence of satisfactory performance of the
rdssions assigned to this ergenization,

2. Sontrol exercised by the Meld

Chief of Mission, Santiago, will exercise indirect
control through Steff Agent Martin J, CCKENIAS, By means
of indepencent checking and reporting procedures, Mssicn
Santiago will keep headquarters informed of the FUNEBRIAL
group's activities, Should the group fail to provide

- an gatisfactory parformance, Mission Santiago will advise
a headquerters to withdraw financiel and technical assis~
: tance,

C. DBuretion of the Project ~~" om
It is anticipated that this project, if approved for
FY 1954, will be continued in the future by veans of a

re-allotment of funds obtained through thse yearly Operational
Frogre=s.

a Possibility of Overlapping Jurisdiction

It is anticipated that FIMUERIAL may eventually be used
~, : to channel support to other groups im Chile, either | existing

4

SSCET

ane



--- Page 61 ---
14-0000

i
i

E
: Fe
G.

weg at

vted, Wiel: Groups may ail whtcun tre provineo o%
UCOWN pro,/sets in Chile.

Tequiree

TAL and FUERIAL-L, both unwitting Chilean officials
YUREESIAL orcpenization, are immediately available
as Principal Agent anc sub-agont, respectively.

2. FKartin J, COKENTAS, a ID Staff Agent, will be tne field
C.ce Officer fer this Project.

Cormuni cats on Plan

1. The present direct corzespondence between DTHABEAS and
FOERRIAL will be supplemented by correspondence between
DTHAEEAS and ertin J, COKEMIAS.

2. Exicting fecilities vill suffice for conrmaications between
Headquarters and Hissicn Santiago and botween idssion and
Martin J, COKGITTAS,

Suvport Plan

1. Sunnort to be furnished by Nealquarters

Support furnished by neacylarters will consist
primarily of operationsl, propagarda, anc technical advico,
as well as the vrovisien of funds,

overtly the activities
£feetiveness of such of
s project,

t4ssion Suntiago will observe o
ef PUNESPIAL's croup to assess the ¢
their activitics as are related to thi

a, At the present time the snecifie financiel requirc-
nents of the FUNEERIAL cormittee cannot be given, nor can
any 2irt schedule of disburserents to the committee be set
forth if‘this anendment since these requirements will be
net on a day-to-day and month-to-nonth basis depending on
the needs of the committee.

b, Disbursements from funds authorized under this
anencient vill be controlled as follows, ‘Perioalically, every
few nenths, the FUISTRIAL committee will subsit a budget to
DTHABZAS for the funds it requires for the succeeding quarter,

rd

{aR Oe ePTFE Erne) Oe SETI Drtameer esr ——— =.


--- Page 62 ---
He

I.

P Miuvarters, the Lunde

$ of Steff Agent lartin J,

table for th fnrsenent in
tal Huis reculs » COGNTAS
in the sullest aneunis possible,
ciency of the
ticnal disburse-
ts until he has received tengihle eviconce of expenditure
receipts) for previous dismirserents, Ordinary disburse-
sants shovld not excoed $1,020.00 and chould be covered by
reecipts within thirty days, -Where the Staff Agent is
certain trat receipts cannot be obtained for largo cisburse-
merts and where the expenditures. cannot be authenticated with
certainty by the Staff Avent, an acendrent to the project
should be rrepared and a proposed acrinistrative plan should
bo forwerded to ieadguarters tor approval, Staff Agent
Mertin J. COKERMIAS shall taxe all reasonable preceutions to
insures that he maintains corplete control of the financed.
phases of this operation at all tines and that el] disburse-
nents adhere to the Confidential Finds Regulations and the
objectives autncrized in this project anc its amendnents.

Ranoerts Procedures

Tm granting financial aid to FUISSRIAL's croup, DTHAREAS

will request pericdic reports of activities and e::perditures.
These reperts will be covertly checked by lassion Santiago,

Coord

No coordination will be required beyond WHD.

as a complotcly cvert and legitimate lecal organizatlon,
with an avowed anti-DGGYPSY progran, the FUNEERIAL group has
neteral cover, WED support will be covered by channeling funds
through the secure DTHABEAS mechanism, lartin J, COKENIAS is a
StaLf Agent uncer unofficial cover in addition to which his
relaticnship with the FUNEGRIAL group will be cerried out in
his capacity es the lecal representative of DTHAREAS,

’
All inéigenoug personnel involved in this project are

unwitting of CDYCKE intorest. Funding, control, and guidance

of the PUHEDRIAL yroup will be handled in such a wey that CDYOKE
interest will not be cisclosed to indigenous or unauthorized
rerrons, Attribution for the group's activities can and will

be accented by the croup, ‘The original souree ef fumis will not
be known by the group.



--- Page 63 ---
14-0000

SECRET

SECURITY PRFORMAT ICN

PRISECT CRYPT ON

PROJECT FINANCIAL DATA

MAY NOT EXCEED SEGRET CLASSIFICATION
RESPONSIBLE STAFF OR OIvIStON 4 Pease COPI SE?
Jot VW. Iss:
A. PERSONKEL REQUIREMENTS
tngtcate number ana type of persornel resuirgd and estimated total comzensatron far.satary, alloeances, travel and
related employee benefits, Inctuse everyone paid from project.

NUMBER ESTIMATED CCMPEKSATION

STAFF EMPLOYEES.

CONTRACT CONSULTANTS

FERED AGENTS
MILITARY

8, SUPPLIES, MATERIEL AND EQUIPMENT
ladleate améunt required in applicsdle spaces, Attach completa supporting bist far each
CHENICAL QUARTERMASTER SUPPLIES aa
$ $
ORDNANCE SPECIAL DEVICES ~ OTHER ELUIPNENT
$ os $

$ no

TOTAL @, 8900
C. OTHER OPERATIONAL EXPENSES
Indicate volume and nature of oxpenses such as (Li maintaince of twa operational houces abroad (2) spot purchase
of Information, ate. 7

(fice, rental and utilities
Publication equipzent and ocelly pure!
Local reinbursenont for repair, S) and sinilar sarvices

ToTAL C.
0. SUBSIDY OR PROPRIETARY PAYMENTS

if funds are to to turned over to individuals of groups in large turp surs to be expended by individuals or
-groups at their discretion to accomplish an egreea-upon objective, explain the tyce of financial accounts, factual
verification or statements, if any, other than a rece:pt for the fdnp sum, ahich witt be obtained.

Yione anticipated

>

TOTAL dD.

TOTAL FUND REQUIREMENTS (A+ 24+ C+ 0) Sx ann

Sun 1982 59-25 SECRET o



--- Page 64 ---
a a SECRET

SECURITY INFORMATION
- E, FUNDING REQUIRENEATS
> AOXIMATE DATES ANS ANSUNTS CF MONEY REQUIRED 1
December 1953 gk ihre 1°54, and each “atteceeding nonth 4 hrough Juno
danvery.1954 2 1954 $1,000 cach,
February 1954
FORM REQUYRED

(FX vu. s. doctars [ZT] Foreign (sreciry) .~ [J] mecoriagce twstRuxesrs (SPECIFY)

ISPECTAL SECURITY REQUIREMESTS OR METHODS OF TRANSMISSION

None Imo
F, SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS

(within securlty IIattations, list any other facts or circumstances ehich wlll enadle Special Support Staff to lend
adequate logistical support to this project. Indicate specificationally the "RUSH" or "TINE? factors Involved?

Expoditious anvroval is requested so that mone; can be expended as soon, as the
FUNEBRIAL group sutmits to DTUABEAS its concrete cost estimates for sotbing up
offices and equipment. ae

SECRET



--- Page 65 ---
14-0000

oN
gy

Ks

~ ' FURIOSO

Loe tver

pBtyy el WAH —

Oglghic dan

hth

‘
H
i


--- Page 66 ---
14-00000

NEMOMARDUM FOR: CHIEP, SPECIAL gaconIsy MIVISTOR
“Sw — SHROUOR 8 FI/ste/sP3
 suBoEC? 3 Pequest for Badgoe-David Atles| PHILLIPS

2. It ig requested that 2 Limited badge te lesued to
: * Mr. David A, Fhilliga, covert Agent for PP/CT, working 4n the
' Bevepacer end lecture Cleld, The limited badge should include
access to the Admin. Building, 2210 "E" Sirea:, I, J, Ky and
L Buildings.

2. Hr, Falllips' aveds to have access Le theese Yudidiass
because of hia frequent comact with various officials t
' : Detter egup him for hig future acgigmwnz, it in anticipated
. unat he will bo ssaigned ta this Agency fer one year,

% For forther infermstion, contact VW. FP. Eavley, PP/
Seourkty Officer, roca 1412 X Dullding, extension 366,

(SIGNED) COLWELL 4. oxaAS
FoR

JOE Eo BAKER
Acting Chief
4 yl Paychologicnl aud Paremtlitary Operations S.aff
ofan ey same, 26 august 1954
Distributions
Pa/ere ae - Orig. 21
PI/SEC/SPB - 1
PP/Admin » 2 ana :
PI/Rz/An = 1 pn |

ewancan Fact ERS

my



--- Page 67 ---
SECRET
Pere Fil led Pas

™, DOCUMENT TRANSFER AND CROSS REFERENCE

\ a ‘ Bo OvsPatew On SOURCE BOC. S¥uauL NO. [a DATE
\ PROJECT * . wees wane
H gt pe ere a
FURIOSO C Fr SouNce Cav rONvul gy, OATE OF INRO. [9+ EVALUATION
3. ANALYST @. DATE PROCETSEO TO. OISSCMINATED IN Tr BATE
Cc. McNew 28 Nov-61 -- biabated

‘ COCUMENT OISPOSITION

12. CROSS REFERRED TO THs FILE . 13. TRANSFERRED TO
XK . RI FILE NO.

REATINENT INFORMATION

1a

Project portion has been removed and sent to RI/AR.
For review of file, contact RI/AR x-2471 using RI
. file number indicated above.

X-ref 201-88764 FULMINATOR-1

wwe eee > P| ft |

FOP B67 vse raevious rosrvous. SECRET eas)

}
l


--- Page 68 ---
14-0000

Cree.

BAV Gi Ay Maite IGA

. ; ene bh
IRS 75-4978
- iyo
2 » pada pg! apsytenn HE
David A. Phillips {5
Reporter x
. se ow

Sets mo : : fag. 5, 1975 .

. : . . ta.
Assistant Attornay General oe 3
In chores af Freedom oF a : bend

7S
—

at of Justice oo
yson DG.

t

Dear Sir,: oo

hnee With the

In seen

fuek ofSeck Fen

3 CU genes

cney Mey lieve on



--- Page 69 ---
14-0000

ae a

ra

25 Augus* 1975" .

occ. - dys + “ se : eens

na David A. Phillips Request on The Bay City Times
; "-75-4978 ; a

.
. oye
eat
’

1

H

~ + .

o -

i

i j -

i }

‘

,
<
: i


--- Page 70 ---
14-0000

seni SESS cnireermanes thee
RECORD MATERI
1. THIS DOCUMENT IS CHARGED TO YOU, .

“KETURN THIS DOCUMENT TO RID/ARCHIVES &

DISPOSITION SECTION, RM GE-58, ON OR BEFORE -_oooo
DATE INDICATED.

ee

3. IF YOU FORWARD THIS DOCUMENT TO ANOTHER
INDIVIDUAL PLEASE CALL EXTENSION,
DO NOT REMOVE THIS FORM

FORM , .
1382) 1790 use previous eo:tions

(47d

TO Requ

: _ Please return byRcU
: ‘ P j reference to RID/ARD/R
‘ Lens A410 P| | _| immediately after use.

De Led
x.

ne -~ 7 , "RECORDS CENTER

JOB wo.__6/-20/3/0__

SPACE NO, ..~Zt tL

1S. RETURN TO:

+ YSO?VKO
10. —
ene
g8S I ——
mm f os
: RE :
wa a gt ; i A
12 ea On D
[i 4 ; No
FA
wooo BO [=<] FIRB NO,_______
o 924% DOCUMENT
9 ;
A Hf
1a a 3 : FOLDER NO. 2
ee ,
| BOX NO. O/T

RID/ARD/RCU G-E-58 ; _ _
rom G10 nee” (C] SECRET ([) CONFIDENTIAL [7] INTERNAL =] UNCLASSIFIED

EDITIONS

or-6t

WLUHLG



--- Page 71 ---
14-0000

BEES dead
DUE DATE _
ieee OF a

THIS DOCUMENT IS CHARGED TO YOU.
RETURN THIS DOCUMENT TO RID/ARCHIVES &
DISPOSITION SECTION, RM GE-S8, ON OR BEFORE

DATE INDICATED. \
L.. .
IF YOU FORWARD THIS DOCUMENT TO ANOTHER :

INDIVIDUAL PLEASE CALL EXTENSION
DO NOT REMOVE THIS FORM

tsi" 1790 USE PREVIOUS EDITIONS.
i
i
{
{

Please return this
reference to RID/ARD/RCU 5 i
!

immediately after use.

RECORDS CENTER

JOB NO.
SPACE NO.

sipesicne Ste

bean?

mb we
gta

|
| FILE NO.-
| DOCUMENT

2

—t
}
| FOLDER NO,
| BOX NO. Pa
i 7
i

Cy CONFIDENTIAL «CJ Us Guty «= C]-UNCLASSTFtED

|

610 "iiss" [7] SECRET

OP-6s



--- Page 72 ---
14-0000

THIS DOCUMENT IS CHARGED TO YOU.

RETURN THIS DOCUMENT TO RID/ARCHIVES &
‘DISPOSITION SECTION, RM GE-58, ON OR BEFORE
DATE INDICATED.

- E : r a
~ , . af YOU FORWARD THIS DOCUMENT TO ANOTHER
INDIVIDUAL PLEASE CALL EXTENSION _____.

' 0 NOT REMOVE THIS FORM

‘Veet 179 use Previous EoITions.

To Requester:

. Please return this
i Te reference to RID/ARD/RCU
LYYELs GA 10 immediately after use.

bi Teade
5. : ‘

RECORDS CENTER
gop No. Gl- /2/3/ $6

SPACE NO. S93
te. a7 . TS ODEO

FILE NO.

DOCUMENT

FOLDER No. /

f

BOX NO. Lot

RID/ARD/RCU G-E-58 }
610 eee" EF] secret (J CONFIOENTIAL £1] US omy © C)_ UNCLASSIFIED

op. 6t



--- Page 73 ---
14-0000

oy . ;
: CONFIDENTIAL
4 ood
. NOTICE

THIS FILE HAS BEEN PROCESSED AND RETIRED, DO NOT ~

ADD ANY. DOCUMENTS TO THIS FOLDER, FORWARD CS

, DOCUMENTS THAT SHOULD BE INCLUDED IN THIS FOLDER

i TO RID/RPU GE-58.

ao ee

NOTICE 4

CONFIDENTIAL

egy

Ta 2593


