
--- Page 1 ---
Throa-10332-10074 | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 | ma

s
’

. . 1
SUMMARY OF AUGUST 1996 REVIEW BOARD ACTIONS ON
SECURITY CLASSIFIED HSCA TESTIMONY OF

sx JOHN SCELSO
(180-10131-10330)

Review 05/1997, "CIA |.
Employee."
Protect first four 10/2017, "Operational
words of line 5; Details."
release rest of line. .

52; 11 R_ (see release on
: p-141)
- 7 .
syners [ReR |
a ee

10/2017 “Describes
technical operation."

Release line 4; 10/2017, "Describes
protect all of line 5; | intelligence operation in
release lines 6 & 7 Mexico City."

56; 19-23 postpone from 4th 10/2017, "Describes
eo word in line 19 — intelligence operation in
through the third Mexico City."
word in line 21; ;
release rest of lines
21-23 ©

10/2017 “Describes ;
technical operation."
10/2017 “Describes
individuals."

10/2017 "Describes
technical operation."



--- Page 2 ---
13-00000

10/2017, "Describes
intelligence operations "
| "Describes a group of

people."

Release line 10,
postpone Ist, 2nd,
and 4th - 6th words
a line 11.

57; 10-11
=F

57:14 | 14

57; 17-19 |= Describes
technical operation."

protect last three 10/2017, “Describes
words on line .20; intelligence operation"
release lines 21-23. _ .

10/2017, "Describes
intelligence operation"

58; 2-3 Release 2017,
“Describes intelligence
oo .
64; 18-21 &
22
68; 13 dt language and
identifier.
83; 14-15 10/2017 “Describes
individual."
8385 Release date 08/2006;
"Crypt."
10/2017 "Describes .
meeting."

83; 22- 23
Release 2017, "No

suitable substitute

Release 2017, "No
suitable substitute



--- Page 3 ---
13-00000
a

Release 2017, "No

PS SYP ERE DN EP OE 3 Pike

suitable substitute
language" —

ais [rR |
84; 17 10/2017 "No suitable
; substitute language."
84; 19 . IP “ 10/2017 "Describes
; : technical operation."

85; 10 Release date 08/2006.
crypt" :
85; 19
86; 12 Release date 08/2006.
. “crypt"
86; 15 10/2017. “describes
. personnel
87; 8 Scelso language and
9 date.

91; 6-7 Release date 08/2006.
a "description."

wo20 [RT

140; 23 a
eer Detail"

a 2017, "CIA
Installation in Western



--- Page 4 ---
CIA team disk 8\ scel_act.wpd_

Review 05/1997 "CIA
Employee."


--- Page 5 ---
13-00000
’ . SECRET

27 September 1996

MEMORANDUM FOR: Executive Director
Assassination Records Review Board

FROM: John F. Pereira
Central Intelligence Agency

SUBJECT: "Reconsideration of Releases in Scelso
Testimony and Lopez. Report

(We request that this memorandum be returned to CIA
once the Board has completed its deliberations on the issues
discussed below.)

_....(S). Issue..._This memo..is to request. that.the JFK... _

Board reconsider its decision to release certain information
contained in the HSCA-testimony of John Scelso ‘and in the
Lopez Report. Specifically CIA requests: that /the phrases
‘political action program" (pg. 64 Scelso Testimony, pg.

} 177, 178 Lopez Report); "Mexican police" (pg. "85 -Scelso
Testimony) ; and "is exposed by Agee in his book" (pg. 141.
Scelso Testimony) fbepostponed-from— release. We also offer
some suggéstions for substitute language which we believe
will not detract from the JFK assassination story, yet still
protect the information at issue.

Iv Mexican Political. “Action Program

"We were running, at that time, a vast political action
program in Mexico City to try to swing Mexico around from
its Leftist direction to a middle of the road direction and
it succeeded. I don't know whether you informed yourself
about the magnitude of our political action program there at
the time -- absolutely enormous"

{(Scelso, 64; Lopez, pp..177, 178)

2. (S) From the early 1950's to the mid-1960's,

Mexico City Station conducted a political action campaign to
minimize leftist influence on and within the Mexican
Government. The campaign utilized student groups, a front
group of progressive businessmen, and Catholic lay group
writers and operatives in political action and media
placement efforts. The Station currently does not have a
political action program designed to influence_ Mexican _

ee CL BY 12224130 5
a CL REASON-1.5(c)
DECL ON X1
DRV FM LOC 3-82
LIA 3-82,HUM 4-82

SECRET


--- Page 6 ---
13-00000

. held that because there has been no official confirmation,

SECRET

SUBJECT: Reconsideration of Releases in Scelso

Testimony _ and Lopez Report
politics, noy has it undertaken such activity anytime in the
Yecent past.——Nevertheless, any public—confirmation—by-the
U.S. Government of those activities would risk an adverse
reaction. Such adverse reaction would impact on current
Mexico City Station operations and be harmful to U.S.

‘A .
interests. NaN Fe ol ly OAS

3. (S) As hag described to the Board in previous iA?
briefings by the ez Missa : , Mexicans guard their ats ‘
sovereignty carefu . Nothing will infuriate them more

than allegations of CIA meddling in their internal politics.

In fact, earlier this year, the Mexican Government postponed

a visit to Mexico by the DCI for fear that it might be

perceived (and exploited) by the Mexican media.and political
opposition as the CIA being called in to assist with

handling the problem of the Peoples' Revolutionary Army.

J

nay

4. (S) The fact that the CIA activity to which the .
Mexicans would object occurred more than 30 years ago will Groped)
not lessen the reaction. Release of the Scelso comments : |
would risk an adverse reaction from the Mexicans, which “Teg. i+
would likely include calls for an examination by the Mexican skola
Government of current CIA activities. This could lead to
increased scrutiny of Station operations and personnel and
could jeopardize our unilateral activities. It could also
have a chilling effect on activities conducted jointly with
the Mexican services, who will be reluctant to engage in
programs that could become subject to public scrutiny and
political debate. \

5. (8S) Furthermore, the fact that these statements
were made by Scelso amounts to an official confirmation of A)
the underlying facts, making it very difficult for CIA to drape’
protect the same or similar information from further release | ADAMO
in the future. Speculation in books, articles, and other ;
publications, or disclosures by Congress are often perceived
by the public as evidence that that information is in the Fou
public domain and therefore is no longer classified. The
CIA has nevertheless been able to legally protect the
information from unauthorized disclosure. The courts have

(i.e. declassification by the appropriate CIA official) the
CIA may continue to protect from release the
the information at issue even when there. has been widespread
public discussion on the issue in questi
be

6. (8S) In this case, should there| bY A question raised
as to the classification status of docu [3 on the
political program referred to by Scelso, it would be
difficult to convince a court that such information had not
been declassified because of the release. by the Board.
Scelso was a long-time.CIA employee who was in charge of the
investigation by the Agency into the assassination of the (ew ee

SECRET oS



--- Page 7 ---
13-00000
SECRET

SUBJECT: Reconsideration of Releases in Scelso
; Testimony and Lopez Report
a President, and his testimony was taken under oath, with the

——knowledge—of the-Agency;—and-in-a classified setting.

Furthermore, the attached letter to Louis Stokes, Chairman
of the Select Committee on Assassination from former Acting
DCI Frank Carlucci also indicates that Scelso was acting as
an official of the CIA. The DCI states that any classified
testimony made by Agency staff before the Committees would
be considered "authorized provision" of the information.
This was to ensure that "all persons respond fully and
truthfully" to the Committee. Carlucci's letter, especially
taken together with the first few pages of Scelso's
testimony, make it clear that Scelso was speaking as an
official of the CIA. new

—_—

7. (S) A court would, therefore, probably find that
Scelso's statements were not just merely speculation by a
former Agency employee, but in fact, were official
confirmation of the political action program. Anything
suggesting official confirmation of classified information
would lead a judge to the conclusion that the information at
issue had been declassified by the CIA. This would make it
very difficult for CIA to continue to protect this
information from unauthorized disclosure. When confusion
arises as to the classification status of information, it
could lead to complicated legal proceedings and protracted
and unnecessary litigation at great expense to all parties.

II. Liaison with Mexico

"We did not have any source of Cuban employees. We only had
Mexican police"...We had a whole reporting set up there with
that, two of them, who watched things like that. (Scelso pg.
185).

8. (S) Release by the Board of Scelso's comments about
the Mexican police in conjunction with surveillance coverage
of the Mexico City airport could similarly have a chilling
effect on our current liaison relationship with the Mexicans.
The Station has worked, and continues to work, with liaison
against compatible targets, including tracking the arrival
and departure at the Mexico City airport of targets of
interest. Although the targets have obviously changed since
the time’ that Scelso is speaking of, these surveillance
operations are ongoing. The success of these current joint
operations could be threatened by any revelation today of
Mexican cooperation with the CIA in the past.

9. (S) CIA objects to this release on similar grounds
as stated in the prior section - disclosure of the: Scelso
comments would constitute official acknowledgment by CIA of
the assistance provided by Mexican liaison to the Agency.
Such acknowledgment could affect not only current operations

aT

ate et ote PST 3

SECRET


--- Page 8 ---
13-00000
. . SECRET

SUBJECT: Reconsideration of Releases in Scelso
Testimony and Lopez. Report _

frome.
i described above, but also result in reluctance by Mexican an
liaison to provide similar assistance” in-the future.” The ee
Mexican Government would likely be subject to criticism by
groups and individuals opposed on nationalism and
sovereignty grounds to such close cooperation with the U.S. \
Government and, even more so, with the CIA. The continued \\
success of ‘CIA cooperation with the Mexicans, whether it be oe olin,
with the-Rresidemty, the intelligence service, or s) \
depends on the fact that those relationships are, and ainnes|
continue to be, secret. wi
10. (S) CIA requests that the Board continue to vals

withhold this phrase from release and substitute in "other
sources" or something similar to this. Omitting the fact
that the airport information was obtained from Mexican
counterparts would probably leave the impression that the
information was obtained unilaterally. Although this still
presents some risk to national security, it does achieve
some level of protection to the Station's equities with

liaison.

; III. Phillip Agee

(S) "That is, the variety and number of telephone

: taps, surveillance teams, photo operations and other
technical operations is exposed by Agee in his book. That
exceeds anyplace else that we had in the world by a lot..."

(Scelso, pg. 141)

i
:
f

, 11. (S) CIA objects to the release of the highlighted
i phrase because, for reasons described in Section 1, it
amounts to official CIA confirmation of the existence of a
c teltap operation conducted jointly with the Mexicans and
with close collaboration with the President of Mexico. As
this Board is well aware, CIA has consistently requested,
i the protection of liaison involvement in this teltap
f operation. As the Board has agreed with CIA's position on
| this matter, the only issue is whether this statement
} reveals what we have agreed meets the criteria for continued |

! protection under the JFK Act.

t

! 12. (S) For the Board's convenience, several relevant . \
pages from Agee's book (Inside the Company: CIA Diary) are 7

: attached. These pages explain in great detail the teltap !
operation and the fact that it was conducted jointly between H
the CIA and the Mexicans. Although such disclosures by ;
former employees are disturbing, they do not amount to
official confirmation of the underlying information.

\ Standing by itself, Agee's book can be dismissed by the

\ Agency as speculation, and do not compromise CIA's ability

to keep the information classified. Scelso's testimony,

however, amounts to official confirmation of Agee's book,

SECRET



--- Page 9 ---
13-00000
of ‘ —_ SECRET

- SUBJECT: Reconsideration of Releases in Scelso
Testimony and Lopez Report
a and does effect the Agency's ability to protect the. an
o-——--—--- -information-from—further release. Equally troubling is s-the™ ~
fact that Scelso's testimony could be read to confirm not
only what is accurate in Agee's book, but also what is
inaccurate.

12. (S) Furthermore, the language used by Scelso is.
clear. The use of the phrase "exposed by Agee in his book"
does not allow for any other interpretation except that
Agee's description of the teltap is accurate. If Scélso had
used other language, such as "has been written about
elsewhere", the existence of the joint teltap operation
would be protected. We request that the Board protect the
phrase as it is and use the above substitute language. Such :
substitute language would not alter the story of the JFK :
Assassination, yet would still allow for the protection of :
the joint operation. :

13. (8S) While the connection between Agee's book and
Scelso's testimony may at first seem attenuated, anyone i
‘involved in the review process conducted by this Board will |
know that it is not. Many individuals follow the decisions |

of this Board closely, and Agee's writings about the CIA are
also well known. It is to be expected that those who read !
the Scelso report would then turn to Agee's book. J

John F. Pereira

SECRET


--- Page 10 ---
13-00000

NOTE FOR:

FROM:
DATE:
SUBJECT:

SECRET

From the Desk of Linda C. Cipriani =”

J. Barry Harrelson
Linda C. Cipriani
09/26/96 12:22:04 PM
Agee Memo - New draft

Here itis... with Jeremy's improvements. Please read it carefully as | had to rush through this. Some of Jeremy's comments were slight
wording changes so as not to offend "the Board" so you may not notice much change. The biggest substantive change was on my FOIA
section (I have skillfully crafted this section to avoid the use of that four letter word!). Please note there is one more paragraph now
because | did add a bit about Scelso being an “official”. And don't forget to attach to Stokes-DC1 fatter which | will fax back to you.

Have fun - and let me know if you need help.

_ AGEEMEMO.DOC

Ce:

SECRET


--- Page 11 ---
13-00000 ve
| SECRET

“23 Bugust 1996

Note For: Fred Wickham, DO
: Eleanor Neiman, DO
‘Mike Luce,” DO/Mexico
{Valerie Patterson,’ DO/EA
Christine Hegeman/ DO/EA
Linda Cipriani; occ

From: J. Barry Harrelson, CSI/HRG
Subject: Meeting with ARRB Staff

1. Thursday afternoon I met with Dave Marwell,
Executive Director for the ARRB, and two of his staff,
Jeremy Gunn and Mary McAuliffe. I briefed them on the four
releases in the Lopez Report and Scelso Testimony that had
been identified as potential appeal items, and on the
Agency's concerns{ re. the Australian documents? I requested
that the Board reconsider the release of the. statements,6n |

{Mexico City political action programs, Scelso's comment on >
}Agee, the reference to the Mexican Police as a source and f
(Warrenton as site of the Agency! s | Record Center.”

2. Maxwell agreed to send a “stafé recommendation” to
the Board recommending that they delay the release of these
four items to hear additional evidence from the Agency. The
rest of the Lopez Report and Scelso Testimony would be
released on schedule. If the Board accepts the staff's
xecommendation, the four items will be addressed at the next. _:
.. Washington meeting (27 September). If the Board rejects the
staff's recommendation, then we have the option of appealing
to the President. Marwell and Gunn seemed confident that ~~
the Board would agree to delay the release.

3. ‘Gunn requested that the Agency's additional
evidence on these four items (if provided in writing) be to-
the ARRB staff by 23 September. The Agency can also brief
the Board members at. the 27 September meeting. As I*

‘ understand -it /<DO/Mexico™ (Mike L.)'will be. preparing - s
- evidence | memos — on peg teed action programs” and ° “Mexican fo

issue .

4. concerning{the Kustvalian documents,, Marwell agreed
to delay Board action until the 16 October meeting. The
Agency's proposal on these documents should be sent to the

ARRB staff as soon as possible.

CL By: (611637, CL REASON: 1.5(c)
DECL ON: X1-< ~~ DRV FM: MULTIPLE ~~

SECRET


--- Page 12 ---
13-00000

PSE lo Moy 1978

“Dehn Sc|etsa (psendo a)
: — tothe. HSC Ae

yy

Pe G4.

Polrticea( action

largest telthap covemge. 5 3Bo lines PP- 52, 53, 56, 57 |

‘is exposeck Cep hs beste ‘ P: 14]
“The. Phrase. . “HF Teleaceart, caudd he
teqethec ulot- uve been Tey ng
te protect - premartly ce goin teltap
Beth the, Mexicans and close. col-
laboration GSetin ~Hhe, Presidente ot
MWMexice, TE alsa qiwes creclence_
pes ee Mong eWlerg ext one of Ages,
ustuch the ency has nerrhec
conGonad ror biped

p.(ss

i Oenkte ree ‘Recweds Res ore Beard members
‘fellos highlighted passages amas Cid - Solomcthead
infaymaton Ae the. Board \ redacted - ;

Bercketed pascages FY! as Boccl upheld delefors



--- Page 13 ---
13-00060 ; ” we EER , 1-64

! been handled in any different manner?

y
1
2 7 ‘Mr. Scelso. It would have been in the case of dissimina-
{
! Ky < : 2 : .
tion of information about him, but I do not think that any

| ;

operational action would have been taken to apprehend him or

to contact him or to try to force him back to the United

ey

7 se4ves HSCA (RG 233)

States.
Ht

Mr. Goldsmith. What about in terms of -- how would the

4 dissemination have been treated differently?

oO

2002 (202) SsH-7yHs
“4

~~

{
j Mr. Scelso. Well, it simply means that we would have

oO

1

i disseminated any additional information that we got.

' .

| Mr. Goldsmith. Did Headquarters ever criticize the
i

Mexico City station for failure to send this information?

Mr. Scelso. No. That was not because we were trying to:

i

i

4 go easy on them, it is simply because it is in the nature of
i

the business. What you are trying to do is engage, as I usec

to say, in important illegal manipulations of society,

PORPPORTIRS QUTEDERG, asm naton » De,

secretly.

We were running, at that time,

. 7 ——

succeeded.’ I/do not know whether you informed yourself
he,
about the magnitude of

our political action program there at

the time -- absolutely enormous.

We were trying to follow the Soviets and all the satel-

At the same time, the main thrust of

1845

lites and the Cubans.



--- Page 14 ---
13-00000

Mr. Scelo. Yes.
Now, why did they not report everything they found out?

Mr. Goldsmith. Answer your own question.

wea (RG 243)

Mr. Scelo. The telephone center envoy was manned by

necscane gL
EXECAN™ 4

4
erican.. These people were just inundated with information
1can.: peop

ally?Hexican supervision offfen. american

and apparently did not extract this and transmit it back to

Washington.

2A (22) SSn-zaHs

The later contacts with the Cuban Embassy, and so on,
which only were divulged after the assassination. It is an
enormous problem. Mexico had one of the biggest .and most? 7
active telephone intercept operations in the whole world
and the job of processing this material is just impossible.

Mr. Goldsmith. Let's go through this step by step,

although I was not going to do this at this time. I am going

REPORTERS MWUELDINA, UASHTHGTON, D.C.
ren

to modify the line of inquiry somewhat.
Do you know how many telephone intercepts there were
in the Mexico City station?
Mr. Scelo. How many lines were being tapped?
Mr. Goldsmith. Yes, at the Cuban and then at the Soviet.
Mr. Scelo. I think there are about @0? lines being tapped
altogether: That is just the number that sticks in my mind.

"total of thirty: from alu

Mr. Goldsmith. Thirty-meaning
both the Soviet and the Cuban?

Mr. Scelo. And various security suspects.

Seeyey rates



--- Page 15 ---
13-00000 , - :
: SECM:
ate - & a: Hag

-

1-53

Mr. Goldsmith. Would the security suspects to related
to the Soviet or Cuban?

Mr. Scelo. Some of them were American Communists

living there whom we tapped at the specific request of J.

on

“téeaves HSCA (RG 223)

Edgar Hoover.

Mr. Goldsmith. Of those thirty 1: ; how many, at your de

best estimate, would have been for the Soviet and Cubans?
Mr. Scelo. However many outside telephone lines they
had.

Mr. Goldsmith. You think just about every outside

phone?

2 Mr. Scelo. I think they tapped all the outside lines.

NO, WASUTHO TON, D.C. 2002" (202) S$54-2505

rey

4 ;
4 Mr. Goldsmith. How certain of that are you?

SUELOL

Mr. Scelo. Well, this is just based on my recollection,

ha

going back 15 years.

REpeerr ies,

Mr. Goldsmith. In any event, your earlier comment was

aM

s
1

that the telephone surveillance operation in Mexico City
was one of the most extensive in the world?

Mr. Scelo. Yes. And of course, they taped a great

bad
a
BS
¢
¢
a

deal which they could not exploit. They could not later
listen to it; they did not have time. They used to listen

to it sort of spottily, you see, and attemst then to expioit

what was the most. important.
Mr. Goldsmith. Your answer to my earlier question as

to why the information on Oswald was not sent to the

SEGRET

101834


--- Page 16 ---
13-00000

“* AFCNAVes. sca (RG 233)

20024 (202) 854-234 5

c.

b,

VAASUTNTON,

REECr Ss WUE ENE,

yy SOM.

(Pause)
Mr. Scelo. Yes.

Mr. Goldsmith. I have a few questions to ask you on

~ _ Ol
[Joint operation conducted ‘by ‘the ‘Mexicans .and the’ atieficang]

here were 30 lineg; jin;

that. This refers to the envoy operation

fact! connected at one timé, so that your early testimony

was, in all likelihood, accurate.

I am going to have to ask you also torread the section

marked number 3, Oswald coverage.
Mr. Scelo. What is that report, if I may ask? .

Mr. Goldsmith. This is taken from the 1977 Inspector

General Report.

Mr. Scelo. I see.

Mr. Goldsmith. Please read the section marked Oswald

Coverage through to the end of the paragraph on page 162.

(Pause)

"Oswald Cover-

On page 161, the section where it says:

Sa ee “yen ge gE MONON a :
£ficer in charge’ of “the™envoy,”<
_ in rd

envoy ‘Listéning post (ror the telephone numbers of::the™ Soviet ,*°

Cuban and satellite embassies in anticipation of possible
coverage. ?.
The question I have for you is as follows. It would ple

seem, from the earlier paragraph, that [thes



--- Page 17 ---
13-00000, Sawa i
1-57

was already in effect, so why would it have been necessary

for[tne Mexican officer in shargel|co ask fehe American officer :]
. mel

~

for the telephone numbers?

Mr. Scelo. [ane Mexicans were probably itappin

|
|
|
:
i

8 things’ at that “time, not these targets. They:.were-tapping /
5 other Mexicans; and so On. We had’ our” own “unilateral tap -

operations «|
Mr. Goldsmith. I understand that.

oy

+ 2024 6202) S5u.23N5

Mr. Scelo. -- on those important targets.

“7 sys sauional Archiveg HSCA (RG 223)

o.¢
a wn

Mr. Goldsmith. So, are you saying that prior to 1962/:
i | the Liaison operations faith the Mexicans did not cover the

Soviet, Cuban and satellite embassies?

Mr. Scelo. That is what that says. I do not really

recall. That would have been in mid~§62%#! That was just

i about the time I was coming onboard in the Mexico desk.

as

a
=

And I do not recall what the previous status was.

a in I do recall that they certainly did ask --[¢
fo j . ons argon ce
= i¢ f-
a
" Bot
é zo | Mr. Goldsmith. It indicates that; ghe liaison operation. |

had“ tap on 30 lines" I£ it was. not’the Sov uban “and

satellite embassies, it makes us wonder what it could have

22: been.
Mr. Scelo. Mexican politicians and security suspects; &

2s : Mexican Communist Party people. There were three or four or

2 SECRET mes


--- Page 18 ---
13-00000 we mg eo AS . wl
a DEUHE: “ aenaa

= Mr. Goldsmith. Is the Mexico City's station's operations

(RG 233)
to

one of the most sensitive of all of the stations at the Agency?
7)

3:
; Mr. Scelso. . It was then. That is, the variety and

ira

number of telephone taps, surveillance teams, photo operations,
and other technical operations is exposed by Agee infhis +, ve

y
3 oF That exceeds anyplace else that we had in the world

by a lot. ‘There is no other station in the world that has i.

that good operations.
Then cand Caracas. fonae got to be real good. Nothing

like it in Europe.
Mr. Goldsmith. I would like to draw your attention to ay

cable which, unfortunately, I do not have with me. The cable
is referred to in Book 5 of the Senate report, written by

, Thomas Karamessinas to the Mexico City station in which he

1

Keproaucea from the holdings of the Nati
onal Archives
HSCA

indicated and said the arrest of Sylvia Deran would jeopordize

U.S. freedom of action.
Do-you remember that cable?
Mr. Scelso. Yes. * -
Mr. Goldsmith. Do you know why it was sent?

Mr. SGelso. At that time, we were not sure that Oswald |

i might not have been a Cuban agent, aiid the arrest of a

Ny
s

ety
is { a

/

i foreign consular person was quite a serious matter under

j international ‘law.

Although Sylvia Duran was a Mexican citizen, I believe,

nevertheless, I did not think -- Karamessinas may not have

_ SECRET _ v01g23
i at

BESROT NG HOM


--- Page 19 ---
Alphabetical and numerical listing of CLA employees,
agents and collaborators arid. organizations controlled,
financed and tnfluenced by the CIA,

AGENCIA ORBE LATINOAMERICANO. Feature news service serving
most of Latin America, Financed and controlled by the cra through
the Santiago, Chile, station, .

AGRIBUSINESS DEVELOPMENT.INC. (aap). Provided cover forcra
officer Bruce Berckmans, q.v.

ALARCON, ALBERTO, Guayaquil businessman and Liberal Party actiy-
ist. Principal agent for cra student operations in Ecuador, Crypto-
nym: ECLosg,

ALBORNOZ, ALFREDO. Ecuadorean Minister of Government (internal
security). Close collaborator of the Quito Station,

ALLEN, JORN, CIA operations officer at Camp Peary training base,
formerly assigned in the Near East.

ALLIANCE FOR ANTI-TOTALITARIAN EDUCATION. Propaganda
mechanism of the Montevideo Station. -

ALMEIDA, WILSON. Publisher and editor of Voz Universitaria, qv. a
university student Newspaper, Propaganda agent for the Quito
station,

AMADOR MARQUEZ, ENRIQUE. Labour and political-action agent of
Guayaquil base. Minister of Economy.

AMAYA QUINTANA, ENRIQUE, Leader of the Peruvian Movement of
the Revolutionary Left (mir), recruited in Guayaquil as a Penetra-
tion agent, Resettled by the CIA in Mexico,

AMERICAN FEDERATION OF STATE, COUNTY AND MUNICIPAL
EMPLOYEES, The US member of the Public Service International

599



--- Page 20 ---
MICAL
(ONAL FEDERATION. OF PETROLEUM AND CHE!
moReRE Gercw). The ris far this industry set up originally by
Whecta through GeUS Ol Wackers International Union.

INTERNATIONAL BEDERA TION OF WOMEN LA’
heck: . ; .
ee ONAL FORICE SCADEMY. ctuccoatret police trina
under: Alm eover i Washington ormerly
shot on Poli Acadeny, founded in Panama by the Panama
IR eR MATIONALEOLICESER WICES SCHOOL, CIA training school for
Poli aa gc). See COORDINAT=
INTERNATIONAL SEODELY CONFERENCE (isc). ce con ‘oonte)
ETARLAT OF KSEIONAL UNIONS OF STUD ( .
me Se ONAL TRADE SECRETARIATS. A generic description re
be ia trade-anion organizations having as members the
one J sniossof works. in a particular industry. There are 15-20
most of wich trave been used by the CIA for labour operations.
Some bawe im:Barope, others in the US but close rela-
tions mamtasscd ei therc Fu in Brussels.
emepegmnntd WORKERS FEDERATION (rF). The
Neenah Gade secreauiat for transport industries. Used by the
Sous. SeJOAQUIN (JACK) OTERO.
Coe Aveiban matried to Ecuadorean. Quito ageot
tha wroteorerktters ityLuis Toroella, q.¥-s and served aa
scriber znd courke for telepbone-tap operation. Cryp

EO; SOME: Welssquista leader and Quito station penetration

a sETURO. of the Inter-Americao
JAUR!

Regicaal Lafior Oxgzaization (ORIT), 4.¥-5 in Mexico City. cra

ariat for rasal woutsns. Usod taythe CLA for labour operations.

oLra, = W a ice commissioner in charge of move-
apo ef ae o renlation. Montevideo station liaison

ea st ion used in operation to
. tevideo station ‘
7 eeak wens Aart ct Embassy of the United Arab Republic

KARAMESSRES; sxonss. Assistant Deputy Director for Plans and

612

KAUFMAN, WALTER J, Chief of Mexico branch of Western Hemi-
sphere Division,

KINDSCHI, JACK. CYA operations officer in Stockholm using non-
official cover of Washington DC public relations firm Robert Mullen
Co. Assigned to Mexico City with same cover, .

KING, COLONEL, J. C, Chief of the Western Hemisphere Division of the: .
DpP, ©

KLADENSKY, OTTO, Quito Oldsmobile dealer and station agent for’
intelligence on the Czech diplomatic mission. Also the cutout to
Reinaldo Varea Donoso, Ecuadorean Vice-President, q.v. Crypto-

- Dym: ECTOSOME Jater DICTOSOME, .

LABOR COMMITTEE FOR DEMOCRATIC ACTION, Propaganda mech-
anism of the Montevideo station.

LADD, RAYMOND. Quito station administrative officer also in charge
of certain operations, .

LADENBURG, ARTHUR, CIA operations officer in Mexico City under

. non-official cover, Later assigned to Santiago, Chile,

LIBIDINAL, Mexico City station postal intercept operation. True
ceryptonym and true names of agents unknown. .

LICALLA, One of three observation posts overlooking the Soviet
Embassy in Mexico City. Names of agents forgotten.

LICOBRA. Cryptonym for operations targeted by Mexico City station
against the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRi) and the
Mexican Foreign Ministry and Ministry of Government.

LicowL-J. Owner of small grocery store near Soviet Embassy, Mexico
City. cia agent. True nanie forgotten.

Licozy-1. Double-agent of Mexico City station against the kas. True
name forgotten,

L1cozy-3. Double-agent of Mexico City station against the KGB. True
name forgotten,

Licozy-5. Double-agent of the Mexico City station against the KGB.
True name forgotica.

LIDENY. Mexico City station unilateral telephone-tapping operation.

True cryptonym and true names of agents unknown.

LIEMBRACE. Mexico City station surveillance team. Names of team

LIENVOY. Joint telephone-tapping operation between Mexico City

station and Mexican security service. Names of agents un-

LIFIRE, Mexico City station travel control and general investigations
team. True names unknown.

LILINK, An operation in Mexico City to provide non-official cover for

613



--- Page 21 ---
iitutions in Santa Barbara. Reports on plans for this trip are
immediately to the White House. .

The station also has its own unilateral telephone-tapping
peration which is limited to special cases where the involvement
the Mexicans is thought to be undesirable. Connections for this
peration are made outside the exchanges by telephone company
engineers who work as station agents, as in the case of the bugging
of the Cuban Embassy (LtsAMPAN). However this is restricted as
“fer as possible in order to avoid damaging relations with the
‘Mexicans in the event of discovery. : ,
" Travel control, general investigations and occasional surveil-
fance are the duties of a six-man team called Lirire, They obtain
flight-travel lists from the airport, which are passed daily to the
station and take photographs of passengers to and from com-
munist countries and of their passports as they pass through
immigration.

Another eight-man surveillance team, known as LIEMBRACE,
has vehicles (including a Volkswagen photo-van) and radio-
communications equipment and is mainly concerned with Soviet/
satellite and Cuban targets, It is administered by Jim Anderson, $
who also controls another eight-man team (rice), similarly
equipped, which deals with the Mexican revolutionaries and other
miscellaneous targets.

Postal interception is mainly directed towards the mail-from

. communist countries, but can occasionally be used to get co:
Support Operations pondence from selected Mexican addronee Set comes
The support operations must also be detailed. (The joint open.g As in every station, a variety of agents assists in support tasks
tion for telephone tapping, LrENVOY, is effected In coo which they perform in the course of their ordinary jobs. For
Otome ‘a capacity for about fory} Processing the immigration papers for station non-official cover
lines. The station provides the equipment, the technical assistance, | personnel, for example, Judd Austin,} one of the US lawyers in
couriers and transcribers, while the Mexicans make the conn, Goodrich, Dalton, Little and Riquelme (the principal law firm
tions in the exchanges and maintain the listening posts. In adéf serving American subsidiaries) is used. The Executive Vice-
tion to monitoring the lines of the communist diplomatic mission President of the American Chamber of Commerce in Mexico
and those of Mexican revolutionary groups, LIENVOY alsocovng City, Al Wichtrich,t channels political information to the station
special cases. For the telephones of ex-President Cardenas that he picks up in his normal work with American and Mexican
and his daughter he ve been tapped, and recently tapping ba businessmen. For technical support the station has an officer of
started on that of Luis Quintanilla, a Mexican intellectual whosf 48D under Embassy cover with a workshop and qualification:
planning a trip to Hanoi with the publisher of the Miami Nea§ im audio, flaps and seals, and photography.
and with a fellow of the Center for the Study of DemocrtB™ - . .

532

nym: LISAMPAN) is still in-the ‘interference-complaint,
Stage.

Another important operation directed against the Cubang
sophisticated provocation that won the CIA Intelligence 4
for Stan Archenhold,t the case officer who conceived iti
operation consisted of a series of letters sent to the Cuban inta
gence service in.their Mexico City Embassy from a person
purported to be a cIA officer trying to help them. The tek

. purport to implicate Joaquin Ordoqui, a respected, old-gut
leader, of the Cuban Communist Party and a high-ranking gy
tary leader, as a cra agent. The letters are based on informatica:
‘from Carlos Manuel Pellecer, the Guatemalan exile and peneigg?
tion agent, who was closely associated with Ordoqui and Marey:
Rodriguez when all three lived in Mexico City during the lat
1950s. The letters continue to be sent to Cuban intelligence y,
‘though Ordoqui was arrested in 1964, and the desired contr.
versy and dissension in the Cuban revolutionary lead
followed, ‘

As the cover of Sherry, the chief of the Cuban operations gq,
tion, is in the Embassy consular section, he has been able to meg
several of the Cuban consular officers directly. However, his maig
agent for direct assessment of the Cubans is Leander Vourvoulias,
Consul of Greece and President of the Consular Corps.



--- Page 22 ---
that they were engaged in political activities. The Chinese had?
fact, been using the NCNA office for propaganda and support
pro-Chinese revolutionary organizations in Mexico and Ceni%
Ancrica, .

Central American Exiles

Mexico has traditionally been a haven for political exiles from,
Central American countries including communists - and other
extreme leftists. Several Central American parties, including the
Guatemalans, maintain liaison sections in Mexico City in order
to keep lines open to the Soviets, Cubans and others. They
operate semi-clandestinely for the most part in order to avoid
repression from the Mexican government.

Washington DC
20 December 1966

Because of the strategic importance of Mexico to the US, its size
and proximity, and the abundance of enemy activities, the
Mexico City station is the largest in the hemisphere. Altogether
the station has some fifteen operations officers under State
Department cover in the Embassy political section, plus about
twelve more officers under assorted non-official covers outside the
; Embassy. In addition, a sizeable support staff of communications
Officers, technical services, intelligence assistants, records clerks
and secretaries bring the overall station personnel total to around

fifty.
Liaison Operations,

Dominating the station operational programme is the LITEMPOt
project which is administered by Winston Scott,t the Chief of
Station in Mexico City since 1956, with the assistance of Annie
Goodpasture,t a case officer who has also been at the station for
some years. This project embraces a complicated series of opera-
tional support programmes to the various Mexican civilian
security forces for the purpose of intelligence exchange, joint

524

ons and constant upgtading of Mexican internal intelli-

‘ collection and public security functions,

At the top of the L1TEMPo operation is the Mexican President,
Gustavo Diaz Ordaz,t who has worked extremely closely with the
gation since he became Minister of Government in the previous

i: tion of Adolfo Lopez Mateost (1958-64). Scott had
go developed a very close working relationship with Lopez
Mateos, and, since Diaz Ordaz became President two years ago,
scott has been working closely with the current Minister of
Government, Luis Bcheverria.{ Thus the Lirempo project
focuses at the top on the President and the current Minister of :
Government who will be the second consecutive choice of PRI
yaders to pass from internal security to the presidency.

Scott’s chummy relationship with Diaz Ordaz none the less has
its problems, In 1964 Fulton Freeman went to Mexico City as
Ambassador to crown a Foreign Service career that had started
in the same Embassy in the 1930s. He is expected to retire after
the 1968 Olympic Games. At the time of his assignment to Mexico
City Freeman’s expectations of meaningful diplomatic relations
with Diaz Ordaz collided with the President’s preference for deal-
ing with Scott, and Freeman was relegated to protoco! contacts
with the President while his diplomatic talents focused on the
foreign Minister. The problem of who would deal with the Presi- _
dent was confused somewhat by the Ambassador's insistence, not
fog after arrival, on a detailed briefing about the station opera-
tional programme, which Scott refused. Eventually both Scott
and the Ambassador visited the White House, where President
Johnson settled matters according to the wishes of the Agency
and of his friend Diaz Ordaz. Scott continued, of course, to work
with the President and the Ambassador never got the full briefing
hehad demanded. Since then the relations between Scott and the

Ambassador have warmed, but the Ambassador forbids any

sation operations directed against the Mexican Foreign Ministry.

While Scott frequently meets the President and the Minister of
Government, two non-official cover case officers handle the day-
to-day contact with the chiefs of the security services subordinate
to Echeverria. One of these officers is a. former FBI agent who
worked in the legal attaché’s office in the Mexico City Embassy
~ the legal attaché is usually the Fei office in an American

525



--- Page 23 ---
. function is performed secretly by the station in deference to Mex:

embassy. The FB! officer had left the FBI to come with the statlgqte
but pains have been taken to conceal his c1A employmen
order to avoid the bad blood that would result from the cit
‘stealing’ of an FB officer. The two non-official cover officers atg™
the equivalent of an A1p Public Safety mission but in Mexico th’

can nationalist sensitivities — as is the case in Argentina. Through"
the LITEMPO project we are currently providing advice and equig...
ment for a new secret communications network to function be”
tween Diaz Ordaz’s office and principal cities in the rest of the
country. Other joint operations with the Mexican security seq’
vices include travel control, telephone tapping and repressiyy
action, . ¥

The station also prepares a daily intelligence summary for Diag
Ordaz with a section on activities of Mexican revolutionary orgs.
nizations and communist diplomatic missions and a section og
international developments based on information from head.
quarters. Other reports, often relating to a single subject, an
passed to Diaz Ordaz, Echeverria and top security officials. These
reports, like the daily round-up, include information from station
unilateral penetration agents with due camouflaging to protect the
identity of the sources. The station is much better than are the
Mexican services, and is thus of great assistance to the authoritieg
in planning for raids, arrests and other repressive action. oe

Liaison between Scott and the Mexican military intelligence
services consists mainly of exchange of information, in order to
keep a foot in the door for future eventualities. The US militay
attachés, moreover, are in constant contact with their Mexicad
military intelligence counterparts and their reports are received
regularly by the station.

Stan Watson,} the Mexico City Deputy Chief of Station, bas
been meeting with a South Korean cia officer. who was recently
sent under diplomatic cover to monitor North Korean sounding
for establishment of missions in Mexico and Central America

Communist Party Operations

The station cp section consists of two case officers, Wad
Thomast{ and Ben Ramirez,} both under Embassy cover, plus

526

{two case officers outside the station under non-official cover: Bob
~Driscoll,t a retired operations officer now working under con-
agract, and Julian Zambianco who was transferred from Guayaquil

‘to Mexico City about a year ago. These officers are in charge of

agent and technical penetrations against the revolutionary organi-
zations of importance, The quality of this intelligence is high,
although not as high as it was before 1963. In late 1962 Carlos
Manuel Pellecer,t the station’s most important communist party
penetration-agent, broke openly with communism by publishing
a book. He was a leader of the Guatemalan Communist Party
(eG) and had been Minister of Labor in the Arbenz goverment
during the 1950s. However, after the Agency-sponsored over-
throw of the Arbenz government Pellecer made his way to Mexico
City where for years he was the station’s best source (cryptonym
LINLUCR) on all the revolutionary organizations in Mexico, not

just the Guatemalan exiles. His book, of course, was financed by

the station and distributed by the Agency all over Latin America,
Pellecer is stilt being used by the Mexico City station as a Ppropa-
ganda agent, as with other former penetration agents who form-
ally break with communism without revealing their years of work
as spies — Eudocio Ravines,t the well-known Peruvian defector
from communism is a parallel case. Another book by Pellecer,
also financed by the station, has just appeared. This book is a
continuation of cra exploitation of the Marcos Rodriguez and
Joaquin Ordoqui cases in Cuba, and is aimed at denigration of the
Cuban revolution. .

The station also collects information about communists fgom
the US living in Mexico. Many of them arrived during the Mc-
Carthy period and some have subsequently become Mexican
citizens. Information about them is mainly of interest to the FBI,
which calls them the American Communist Group in Mexico
City (acGMc). Information collected about them includes that
obtained through the LIENVOY telephone-tapping operation des-
cribed below. .

The station also receives copies of reports from FBI penetration
operations against Mexican revolutionary organizations. Mexico
is the only country in Latin America, except Puerto Rico, where
the FBI continued operations against the local left when the c1A
took over in 1947, The Fs! intelligence is of high quality,

527



--- Page 24 ---
” areunderway,
The station

Embassy, whi

in the back of the
The LICALLA o
the back is the cl
hi losest
louses bordering ~ all five are Of five

ere made of Soviets

an au visitors to the Embassy, When visitors use vehicles, photo.
fener en of their licence plates for tracing. Occasionally
eae oa nee is used for electronic Monitoring, since it ig
fron ee me bassy, but so far Attempts to pick up radiations
fe Cryptographic equipment have been unsuccess.

departures, Monitoring of Mexican diplomatic communications

" Mexico — possibly Soviet intelli rs
- aoe gence office iT
illegals’, with false identi von icers assigned abroad as
528

pe station runs between fifteen and twenty access agents
‘inst the Soviets with varying degrees of effectiveness and
Fiability. Several of these agents are suspected of having been
‘ruited by the Soviets for use as double agents against the
lation. Two of the most important of the current access-agents

Mare Katherine Manjarrez,t Secretary of the Foreign Press Associa-

and her husband — both of whom are targeted against the
soviet “press attaché and the Tass correspondent. Others are
peowL-]f and LIovaL-L.} .

- y1coWL-1 is the owner of a tiny grocery store situated in front

“of the Soviet Embassy where the Soviets buy odds and ends in-

duding their soft: drinks - rsp is studying ways of bugging a
wooden soft-drink case or the bottles themselves. More import-
sot, L1COWL-1 is involved at.the moment in an operation against
the Embassy zavhoz (administrative officer), who spends consider-
able time chatting with the agent. Because Silnikov, the zavhoz,
bas been on the prowl for a lover — or so he said to LicowL~1 —
the station decided to recruit a young Mexican girl as bait: An
appropriate girl was obtained through BESABER,} an agent who
is nonmally targeted against Polish intelligence officers and who
mins a ceramics business specializing in souvenirs. By loitering at
LICOWL~I's store the girl attracted Silnikov’s attention, and a
hot necking session in a back room at the store led to several
sfious afternoon sessions at the girl’s apartment nearby —
obtained especially for this operation. Silnikov’s virility is as-
tonishing both the girl and the station, which is recording and
photographing the sessions without the knowledge of the girl.
Although promiscuity among Soviets is not abnormal, relation-
ships with local girls are forbidden. Eventually it will be decided
whether to try blackmail against Silnikov or to provoke disrup- —
tion by sending tapes and photos to the Embassy if the blackmail
isrefused.

LiovaL-It is not as interesting a case but is more important.
The agent is an American who teaches English in Mexico City
and is an ardent fisherman. Through fishing he became acquain-
ted with Pavel Yatskov, the Soviet Consul and a known senior

| KG officer — possibly the Mexico City rezident (KGB chief). Yats-

kov and the agent spend one or two week-ends per month off in
the mountains fishing and have developed a very close friendship.

529



--- Page 25 ---
13-0000!

. in him has fallen off and the Bi turned the case back over to thé

Operations

¢ Cuban operations section consists of two case officers,
prancis Sherry and Joe Piccolo, and a secretary under Embassy

aE fficial cover. An observa-
and full-time CIA employee, went to Mexico City to Study dhe oor aot for photographic coverage and radio contact with the
cde thet tee a song pong ter tionne eee fowon act survellence am sfunconioga wel a iekvor
recruited by Yatskov and is reporting on Paul Dillo the , hone monitoring and LiFiRe airport travel control. Through
in charge of this Ne the operation go LIFIRB team the station obtains regular andsstine access
officer case. Nevertheless, c is an
tinues while the counter-intelligence aspects are studied fur th ae “to the sr petween Pi beadguarters in Haven and its correspon.
_ The station double-agent cases against the Soviets, Licozy-4 ‘4 Pose voughout the hemisphere are forwarded to the stations
Licozy-3f and Licozy-5,t are all being wound up for deals

of productivity or problems of control. One of these agents?
Licozy-3, is an American living in Philadelphia who was te:
ctuited by the Soviets while a student in Mexico, but who reported
the recruitment and worked for the Mexico City station. Hg
worked for the rai after returning to the US — the Soviet cage
officer was a UN official at one time — but recently Soviet interes

well-known kGp defector from the 1950s who is now a US cits

Through the LiTeEMPo liaison operation the Mexican immi-
ion service provides special coverage of all travellers to and
fom Havana on the frequent Cubana flights. Each traveller is
photographed and his passport is stamped with arrival or depar-
ture cachets indicating Havana travel. The purpose is to frustrate
the Cuban practice of issuing visas on separate slips of paper in-
gead of in the passport so as to obscure travel. Prior to each
Cubana departure the station is notified of all passengers so that
same checks can be made. In the case of US citizens, the Mexican
savice obliges by preventing departure when requested by the
ion.
othe most important:current operation targeted against the
Cuban mission is an attempted audio penetration using the tele-
phone system, Telephone company engineers working in the
LIDENY tapping operation will eventually instal! new wall-boxes
for the Embassy telephones in which sub-miniature transmitters
with switches will have been cast by Tsp. At the moment,
however, the engineers are causing deliberate interference in
Embassy telephones by technical means in the exchange, Each .
time the Embassy calls the telephone company to complain of
interference on the lines, the engineers report back that every-
thing in the exchange is in order. Eventually, as the interference
continues, the engineers will check street connections and finally
arrive to check the instruments in the Embassy. They will find the
wall-boxes ‘defective’ and will replace them with the bugged
boxes cast by Tsp. Right now, however, this operation (crypto-

3531

Agency for termination. .

Against the Czechs and the Poles many of the same types of
operation are targeted. Access agents, observation posts, tele.
Phone tapping, surveillance and travel control are continuous
although with somewhat less intensity than against the Soviets,
In the Yugoslav Embassy the code clerk has been recruited by the
crAas has one of the Embassy’s secretaries.

Until the New China News Agency (NCNA) office was Closed
last month by the Mexican government, the Soviet/satellite sec.
tion of the station was responsible for following the movements
of the Chinese communists. Telephone intercepts through
LIENVOY and occasional surveillance by the L1RICE team were
directed against them, but the most important intelligence col-
lected against them was from the bugging of their offices. The
audio operation was supported by the Far East Division in head.
quarters, who sent an operations officer and transcribers to
Mexico City. Now that the NCNA offices are closed, the audio
equipment will be removed and the station will continue to
follow up the many leads coming from the bugging operation.

530



--- Page 26 ---
13-00000. . wom so
. a 1-185

Mr. Goldsmith. What do you mean, things like this

happened all the time?

Mr. Scelso. Planes were held for travellers who would

otherwise miss them, for Cuban officials, and so.on,.

ta

Mr. Goldsmith. Did the Agency ever actually investigate,

this particular matter?
i Mr. Scelso. It investigated to the extent that there
| was nothing heft to investigate. The plane was gone. The

man was on it. He had not identified himself before he left.

ole

Ay

We had very complete coverage of: the Mexico City Airport:

———

and watched the Cuban flights closely, but where it sometimes

.
be

happened that an important Cuban official would comé late,

he would go directly to the plane without going through

travel controls.

At that time, the man was gone. There was no picture

Reproduced trom the holdings of the Nation
al Archives
: HSCA (RG 233)

of him. . Nobody looked at his passport. Period.

WL REPORTERS BUTLDING, WASITAGTON, D.C. 20024 (202) $5n-23058

Mr. Goldsmith. You did not bother to ask any Cuban

18 employees in the Airport about the man?
Mr. Scelso..We-did-not have any source of Cuban
ara, One \res ger
29 employees.\_ We only had Mexican ‘police: __

Mr. Goldsmith. Were any of them questioned about him?

304 Pr STRENT,
mn)
(ae et es a ae ean eae meee Rett ate Tate Se eee eee Fog mene ey

Mr. Scelso. Yes, this was a routine thing. We had a

See Dae sown det ant meralee Sante, new fee:

whole reporting set up there with*that, two of them, who
watched things’ 1iké*this. But the report from them was that
the man had just gone on the plane and they did not know who

SEreel 101967.

ALIZASON REPORTING COMFPatyY


--- Page 27 ---
13-00000

HscA Summon ~ of sul aud the GIA -
- win Wlexice Ci ty
aby:

=< : a Sih a a RAR ERT RRR

ation, onder Ann coven;
Iso Ca Coett , ot is “the
Arches Sor Cit aldings

teltap cotereg = & Bo Imes

ident Cicabien ef Samet cCAcials
roc tend.

ideot Creation of Coben o€iciels
‘targetted



--- Page 28 ---
13-00000

Classification: _: 4.

(This form is to be used for material extracted
from ClA—<ontrolled documents.)

7A4-

was in operation on only four of those days. This
“Committee has not been able to establish or disprove
the possible inference that LILYRIC covered those
days when there was no coverage from LIMITED because
the production and logs from the LILYRIC base were —
not made available for review. That material was
requested but has not been made available.141/ An
explanation of why this material is missing was
requested on 7/25/78.142/ The CIA's explanation stated ~*
that the photographs and logs “may have been destroyed
ios in a purge of Mexico City Station files and that the
folders for the destroyed material were reused to
forward more recent photographic material to
Headquarters for retention. "143/ The’ folders which
once contained the production were located at the
wy National Archives '{Waunetiton, Records Center but, wtcx
y ~ a —
according to the CIA's explanation, the folders
contained production material from 1967.144/ Because
the CIA has not provided the photographic production
and logs from the LILYRIC for examination, no

Precise determination detailing the effectiveness of

the coverage of the Soviet compound can be made.

Classification: __



--- Page 29 ---
13-00000 - --

ewer

Net geee

—— ~~ —e ~———w eccmerer —_—_—

Classification: 4

(This form is to be used for material extracted
- from ClA—controlléd documents.)

-54-—

surveillance project.189/ ‘Even though Mr. Scott was
the nominal case officer, the “routine case officer
functions" were performed by Ms. Ann Goodpasture.190/
An American technician was stationed in the listening
post to maintain the equipment and to protect the
Station's interests there.191/ Ms. Goodpasture's
“duties in this operation ranged from meeting with

the technician/officer inside the base for the purposes
of daily supervision of the operation to handling the
collection and distribution of the tapés and transcripts.192/

Ms. Goodpasture worked in this capacity until 1968.193/

With the-exceptiof of the technician; the listening: /
post. and thestranscripti Ofethisubase 0

staffed by Mexican Akmysotficérs}194/ This listening

SER Seem

post covered up to thirty? lines at one time.195/ OE ae

b. Analysis ‘and Reporting of Information

Obtained

[Mrs Herbert Manet] was responsible for the

y} analysis, processing, and daily review of the Soviet

mder covers) transcripts.196/ The transcripts were reviewed on a

pad daily basis by [Barbara wané11,| Jirs wali] would
fai (62-2. age . “ ra _—
“Mey 1997 Classification: _- i

i BELLE oy

Te, WHR,

hak

A

a)
serene


--- Page 30 ---
13-90000 -cmsw - osm ae anne Aker ame women panne aur

“EET Quark
Classification: 152 & By

(This form’ is to be used for material extracted
from CiA—controfled documents.)

=56-

It should be noted, though, that an examination of
the project files shows that Americans in contact
with Communist diplomatic institutions were routinely

reported to Headquarters for name traces and dissemination

“Ey, = EA “SEAN,

to the intelligence community.203/ .
3. Telephone Lines Covered

This Committee has made an attempt to determine

which telephone lines at the Soviet and Cuban
diplomatic compounds were subject to this electronic

intercept operation in September and October of 1963.

The monthly operational report of this project for

the month of September lists the following phones

SENT,

as targets of the operation:204/

14-42-37 Cuban Embassy
14-92-14 _ Cuban Embassy £
25-07-95 Cuban Embassy E
14-13-26 Cuban Embassy
15-60-55 Soviet Embassy ( le
15-61-55 Soviet Embassy ( i
15-69-87 Soviet Embassy £
15-61-07 Soviet Embassy i
15-12-64 Soviet Embassy |

The report notes that lines 14-92-14 and 25-07-95 at {

t
the Cuban Embassy were disconnected on 23 September {

1963.205/ The monthly report for October says that |


--- Page 31 ---
13-00000

Classification: 4 £U eran: TT
UT OiGag

(This form is to be used for material extracted
from ClA—controlled documents.)

o-71-

in a chronological file.292/ One copy of the Cuban
transcripts was routinely sent to Headquarters on

a weekly basis.293/

(g) Format of Transcripts

The format of the. transcripts ‘that Mr. Tarasoft
produced was much ‘the same as those of the Spanish.
language transcripts described above.294/ Mr. -
Tarasoff's transcripts were from Russian into English.295/.
Many of Mr.. Tarasoff's transcriptions bear the notation
“(previously transcribed)" after the meter number
referring to the reel footage location of a
conversation.297/. Mr. Tarasoff indicated that this
notation meant that the conversation had already been
transcribed from a. tap on another embassy phone:

"Previously transcribed" ‘means, for instance,

I went to the embassy first and the embassy

number was 605055. Now this number 501264

belonged to the film's office. So consequently

if that particular call went out of the main

building to the films office and it had been

transcribed before, that is exactly what I

would do, put down “previously transcribed".
So there was no question of doing it twice.298/

Thee dl, 187

£ Cxiitied by derivation:

sweRTM. sem, Sa,

UTNE,

errs SNIP NITE,


--- Page 32 ---
13-00000

20 tE SD

Classification: = 4% “sat an fil

(This form is to be used for material extracted
from ClA—controlled documents.)

-58-

o

subject to the intercept operation. It should be

noted, though, that there were five lines tapped in

_ the Cuban compound in 1964.212/ They were:

14-42-37 The Ambassador's private telephone
25-07-95 The Chancery

14-13-26 The Chancery

25-09-14 The Commercial Office

11-28-47 The Consulate

One CIA employee who was involved in Cuban
operations in Mexico City remembered that there were
taps on the telephone of the Cuban Consulate.213/ It is
possible that the-employee, Mr. PhiTlips, who ‘Was “stationed
in Mexico City from 1961 to 1966, was incorrect, after
a fifteen-year hiatus, in placing this tap in 1963.214/
As the above notes, an examination of the project
files fails to support: Mr. Phillips‘ memory,

although those files do show that the Consulate

telephone was tapped in 1964.

4. Production from Operation

The intercept listening post operated from

approximately 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. every day.215/

Classifications —— _ 174

ay
4 by derivation:

f

oN

SMA,

SIM,


--- Page 33 ---
13-00000-° zi”

=

(This form is to be used for material « extra
from ClA—controlléd documents. )

— 177 7

Q: Had the information concerning Oswald's visit
to the Cuban Embassy in addition to the Soviet
- one, ‘that Oswald had been requesting a visa, —
if it had been sent to CIA headquarters, would
his case prior to the assassination have been
handled in any different manner? .

A: It would have been in the case of dissemina- -
tion of information about him, but I do not
think that any opérational action. would have
taken to apprehend him or to contact him or
to try to force him back to the United States.

Q: ...how would the dissemination have been
treated differently?

A: Well, it simply means that we would have dis-
seminiated any additional information that we
got. 657/ .
It. cannot be determined with exactitude whether or
not this additional information about Oswald was reported
to Headquarters. In all lTikelihood it was not. The Chief
of the Mexico Desk was asked whether or not the Station
was ever criticized for this failure to report in the
face of a specific request to do so by CIA Headquarters.
He said: :
Ko. That was not because we were trying to go
easy on them, it is simply because it is in the
nature of the business. What you are trying to

do is engage, as I used to say, in important il-
Tegal manipulations of society, secretly.

feical We were running, at that time, a vast/poli- i
tical action program in Mexico. Cityfto try to ;
{swing Mexico around from its ‘Leftist dir c i
ito. a middle of the road. directionya i

ae

CRIES

is



--- Page 34 ---
13-0000. 7, . mo
Classification: a

(This form is to be used for material extracted
from ClA—controlled documents.)

- 178 =

I do not know whether_ ormed yourself about >
the magnitude of our/political action program at.

the time--absolutely enormous.

. We were trying ‘to “foliow the Soviets and
all the satellites and the Cubans. At the same
time, the main thrust of the Station's effort
was to attempt to recruit Russians; Cubans and
satellite people. 658/
Perhaps the nature of the CIA Mexico City Station's .
handling of the Oswald case prior to the assassination
can best be summed up in Dave Phillips' response when-
he was asked how he would characterize tliat handling:

“At the very best, it is not professional, at the. best." 59/

V. Mexico City Station Reporting of Information Concerning
Oswald After the Assassination
A. Reporting of information concerning the photograph

of the Mexico Mystery Man

, Even though some people in the Station clearly dis-
associated the photograph that was described in MEXI 6453
from Oswald after receiving the 10/11 cable, 656/ it is
clear that some people still considered it possible for .
some reason that the photograph was of Oswald. In Octo-
ber, Ann Goodpasture had argued this very point with Win-

ston Scott. 657/ On the day of the assassination, the

Mexico City Station cabled ica it “was sending

Classification: 35
as soon as possible “copies oF only visTitor to %

OM fear:
|

ig Classified by derivation:

Ae me ee ae ee

| SERRA RETA

pag

tnt

OUT,

ee

we ena,


--- Page 35 ---
13-00000

SECRET hyp Wer

Pm
From the Desk ofilinda C. Cipriani”
Kee :

NOTE FOR: John F. Pereira

J. Barry Harrelson
Eleanor E. Neiman @ DO
Fredrick C. Wickham @ DO
Johnny L Goins. @ 00
Fred Crawford 00

FROM: Linda €. Cipriani /

DATE: 04]24/96 12:15:25 PM
SUBJECT: Interview with John W. (S)
CL By 2224130

CL Reason 1.5(c)

DECL On X1

DRV FM Hum 4-82

Attached is an MFR summarizing my meeting with Mr. Whitten. On a more personal note, Mr. Whitten is an extremely
charming and interesting gentleman. The meeting with him went much better than | had hoped, but it was also rather emotionally
distressing for both Jeremy and |. Mr. Whitten broke down several times during the meeting and was obviously feeling very scared.
Although Jeremy is sure that the Board will de the right thing here, we both agreed that Mr. Whitten is without doubt someone who
should be protected even if it means going to the President.

WHITTMFR.DOC

Ce:

SECRET


--- Page 36 ---
13-00000

SECRET

17 May 1996

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Interview with John Whitten (S)

1. On 22 April 1996, from approximately 1000 to 1600,

' Jeremy Gunn, General Counsel of the JFK Revi oard, and I spoke
_with Mr. John Whitten at the U.S. embassy in?Vienna). Gunn
conducted the interview by showing Whitten various documents and
‘his prior testimony before the HSCA. Mr. Whitten was eager to
“help the Board.in any way he could and even offered to come to

’ the US if need be. Gunn concluded that it would probably not be
_ useful to take Whitten's deposition at a later date. Although
Whitten had in general a good memory, Gunn felt he did not add
_anything of significance to his prior testimony before the HSCA.
After the interview, Mr. Whitten took us to his apartment and
then later to a restaurant with his wife. We left Mr. Whitten
‘about 1900. (8) ;

: 2. | Mr. Whitten was extremely worried and upset about the
release of his name and on several occasions in the interview was
on the verge of tears. Although I was expecting him to be angry
‘with CIA and thé Board, instead, he clearly felt hurt and
' betrayed. His obvious physical problems add to this feeling of
being vulnerable. Physically he is not well; he is paralyzed on

‘his left side and has great difficulty walking. On a map, he
pointed out his apartment and indicated what he believed to be
‘serious threats to his safety should his affiliation with CIA
‘become known. Within a block of his apartment, he pointed out
ithe headquarters.of the PKK, the Rnafchist party anda bar where
many Middle Easterners would. congregaté ./~He then-pointed—ou :
these places to us. when we went to his apartment. He made it
clear that there was no way he could defend himself from any
‘attack. (S

3. Mr. Whitten also stated that he has been retired for
almost as long as he worked for the CIA, and that he has a
completely different life now in?Vienna He. and his wife have
lived in @ienna/ approximately 25 years. He is a member of

arious musical and art societies. He sings in a prominent
(vienna) Men's Choir. He has published various articles on music

is Specialty is Johann Strauss He has received many medals
-for his work in the arts jin ‘Vienna }which we saw when we went to
‘his apartment. (S)

4. Mr. Whitten is also great ty yw worried about the fact that

he committed perjury when applying for/Aust rian) residency by
‘stating he worked for{the State Department believes this

CL BY: (2224130 ;
CL REASO.

DECL ON: X1
DRV FM: HUM 4-82

SECRET


--- Page 37 ---
SECRET

SUBJECT: Interview with John Whitten (S)

services as a consultant to thé police or intelligence service.
He obviously was extremely distraught and was voicing what he -
believed were his options should his name be released by the
Board, although he had not decided on a particular course of
action. On the other hand, Mr. Whitten was adamant that no
matter what happens he would never betray the CIA by telling
anyone about his work as an intelligence officer. (8S)

5. By the end of the evening, Mr. Whitten stated that he
felt much better about the state of events. On several occasions,
I had assured him that CIA was doing everything to protect him
and Gunn had. stated he would argue for his protection to the
Board. He clearly looked upon Gunn and I as his allies in this

. process and. even stated that he had a "wonderful" day talking to
. us. We left him, I believe, feeling happy and confident all would

turn out well. (8S)

6. After our meeting with Whitten, I spoke with Gunn

' about how this issue would be handled by the Board. Gunn

believed that it was more than likely that the Board would agree

, to protect him and that he would make the strongest argument he
* could to them. The Board will make its decision in it's next
' meeting in mid-May. Gunn did not think it would be necessary for

anyone from CIA to come down to that meeting. We agreed that
should the Board make the reprehensible decision of releasing
Whitten's name, that we could not imagine a stronger case on

‘which to bring an appeal to the President. (S)

(Linda C. Cipriani

-DCI/OGC7LD

SECRET


--- Page 38 ---
13-00000

SECRET

SUBJECT: Interview with John Whitten (S)

DCI/OGC/LD/LCipriani;/76124 (17 May 96)
Distribution:
Original - Original
1 - Registry
1 - Lit File
3

SECRET


--- Page 39 ---
13-00000
- . SECRET

24 April 1996

_ MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
_ SUBJECT: Interview with John Whitten (Ss)

1. On 22 April 1996, from approximately 1000 to 1600,
Jeremy Gunn, General Counsel of the JFK Review Board, and I spoke
with Mr. John Whitten at the U.S. embassy ir -Gunn ;

' conducted the interview by showing Whitten ‘various documents and
his prior testimony before the HSCA. Mr. Whitten was eager to
‘help the Board in any way he could and even offered to come to
the US if need be. Gunn concluded that it would probably not be
‘useful to take Whitten's deposition at a later date. Although
Whitten had in general'a good memory, Gunn felt he did not add
‘anything of significance to his prior testimony before the HSCA.
‘After the interview, Mr.. Whitten took us to his apartment and
‘then later to a restaurant with his wife. We left Mr. Whitten
‘about 1900. (S) -

2. Mr. Whitten was extremely worried and upset about the
release of his name and on several occasions in the interview was
on the verge of tears. Although I was expecting him to be angry |
with CIA and, the. Board, instead, he clearly felt hurt and
betrayed. His obvious physical problems add _ to this feeling of
being vulnerable: ‘Physically he is not well; he is paralyzed on
-. his left side and has -great. difficulty walking --On-a map; en
~ pointed out his apartment and indicated what. he believed to be

‘serious threats to his safety should his affiliation with CIA.
‘become known. Within a bloc of bis apartment, he pointed out
|the headquarters of the PKK, the Anarchist party and a bar where»
many Middle Easterners would congregate: He then point

p

“these places to us when we went to his apartment. He made it
' ‘clear that there was no way he could defend himself from any
‘attack. (S Log

3. Mr. Whitten also stated that he has been retired for
‘almost as long as he worked for the CIA, and that he has a
‘completely different life now in| Vienna’ He and his wife have
lived in (Vienna) approximately 25 years: He is a member of
various musical and art societies. He sings in a prominent
Vienna? Men's Choir. He has published various articles on music .
pecialty is Johann Strauss). He has received many medals.
for his work in the arts}in Vienna which we saw when we went to

his apartment. (S)

4. Mr. Whitten is also greatly worrie: out the fact that
he committed perjury when applying for /Austrian /residency by
stating he worked for}the State Department, Hé’ believes this

CL BY: {22241307
CL REASON: 1.5(c)".
. DECL ON: Xl ° |
; DRV FM: HUM 4-82

SECRET


--- Page 40 ---
~ _ SECRET

SUBJECT: Interview with John Whitten (S)

_ could subject him to criminal penalties infaustria} He stated on

’ several occasions, should. his affiliation become known, he would

_ have to leave {Austria On o ions, he stated that he
would turn himself in to the?Viennese/authorities and offer his

services as a consultant to the police or intelligence service.
He obviously was extremely distraught and was voicing what he
believed were his options should his name be released by the

- Board, although he had not decided on a particular course of
‘action. On the other hand, Mr. Whitten was adamant that no
: Matter what happens he would never betray the CIA by telling
. anyone about his work as an intelligence officer. (S) :

5. By the end of the evening, Mr. Whitten stated that he
felt much better about the state of events. On several occasions,
I had assured him that CIA was doing everything to protect him

‘and Gunn had stated he would argue for his protection to the

Board. He clearly looked upon Gunn and as his allies.in this

' process and even stated that he had a "wonderful" day talking to

us. We left him, I believe, feeling happy and confident all would
turn out well. (S) . .

6. After our meeting with Whitten, I spoke with Gunn

_ about how this issue would be handled by the Board. Gunn
‘believed that it was more than likely that the Board would agree

to protect him and that he would make the strongest argument he

‘could to them. The Board will make its decision in (it's) next

meeting in mid-May. Gunn did not think it would be nécessary for

; anyone from CIA to come down to that meeting. We agreed that
_. ghould-the -Board-make..the-.reprehensible decision. of.-releasing
.Whitten's name, that we. could not imagine a stronger. case. on ......

. which to bring an appeal to the President. (S)

’ Quinda C, Cipriani).
OGC/LD

SECRET


--- Page 41 ---
13-00000

SECRET

24 April 1996

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

SUBJECT: Interview with John Whitten (S)

1. On 22 April:1996, from approximately 1000 to 1600,

. Jeremy Gunn, General Counsel of the JFK Revi Board, and I spoke
with Mr. John Whitten at the U.S. embassy jn? Vienna\. ‘Gunn ;

conducted the interview by showing Whitten various” documents and

- his prior testimony before the HSCA. Mr. Whitten was eager to

_ help the Board in any way he could and even offered to come to

the US if need be. Gunn concluded that it would probably not be

: useful to take Whitten's deposition at a later date. though
Whitten had in general a good memory, Gunn felt he did not add

| anything of significance to his prior testimony before the HSCA.
_ After the interview, Mr.. Whitten took us to his apartment and
.then.later to a restaurant with his wife. We left Mr. Whitten

‘about 1900. (S) -

2. Mr. Whitten was extremely worried and upset about the

release of his name and on several occasions in the interview was

on the verge of tears. Although I was expecting him to be angry
with CIA. and the Board, instead, he clear ¥ felt hurt and
betrayed. His obvious physical problems add to this feeling of
being vulnerable. Physically he is not well; he is paralyzed on
his left side and has. great. difficulty walking «On a map; hes
pointed out his apartment and indicated what he believed to be
serious threats to his safety should his affiliation with CIA

bi 1 ithin a block of his apartment, he pointed out
the headquarters of the PKK, the Anarchist party and a bar where)
many Middle Easterners would congregate,‘ He then pointed out
“these places to us when we went to his apartment. He made it
hear, that there was no way he could defend himself from any
‘attack. (S -

: 3. Mr. Whitten also stated that he has been retired for
‘almost as long as he worked for the CIA, and that he has a
completely.different life now in/Viennai He and his wife have
lived in(Vienna) approximately 25 years. He is a member of
-various muSicak and art societies. He sings in a prominent
Vienna}Men's Choir. He has published various articles on music
“(his specialty is Johann Strauss). He has received many medals
‘for his work in the arts({in Vienna which we saw when we went to
his apartment. (S)

4. Mr. Whitten is also greatly ied about the fact that
che committed perjury n-applying fox jAustrian) residency by

stating he worked forlthe State Depar menty. @ believes this

CL BY:

CL REASON: 1.5(c)
DECL ON: X1 ;
DRV FM: HUM 4-82

SECRET


--- Page 42 ---
13-00000

SECRET

SUBJECT: Interview with John Whitten (S)

could subject him to criminal penalties in {Austria} He stated on
several Teave ihust aie affiliation become known, he would
have to leave jAustria}. On o x.occasions, he stated that he -
would turn himself in to the (Viennese authorities and offer his
services as a consultant to the police or intelligence service.

He obviously was extremely distraught and was voicing.what he
believed were his options should his name be released by the

Board, although he had not decided on a particular course of

action. On the other hand, Mr. Whitten was adamant that no
matter what happens he would never betray the CIA by telling
anyone about his work as an intelligence officer. (S)

5. By the end of the evening, Mr. Whitten stated that he
felt much better about the state of events. On several occasions,
I had assured him that CIA was doing everything to protect him
and Gunn had stated he would argue for his protection to the
Board. He clearly looked upon Gunn and(1/as his allies in this
process and even stated that he had a "wonderful" day talking to
us. We left him, I believe, feeling happy and confident all would
turn out well. (S) .

6. After our meeting with Whitten, I spoke with Gunn
about how this issue would be handled by the Board. Gunn
believed that it was more than likely that the Board would agree
to. protect him and that he would make the strongest argument he

could to them. The Board will make its decision in sg) next
meeting in mid-May. Gunn did not think it would be nécessary for
anyone from CIA to come down to that meeting. We agreed that

should the Board make the reprehensible decision.of releasing
Whitten's name, that we could not imagine a stronger case on
S)

_ which to bring an appeal to the President.

' (binda Cc. Cipriani 5
C1 Osc LD

2
SECRET



--- Page 43 ---
13-00000

a SECRET
20 November 1995
MEMORANDUM FOR: Eleanor Neiman
FROM: { Sue A. Burggraf 7
SUBJECT: Per our telecon, here is a copy of the cable that came in on Friday
{ from Vienna}
vy
REFERENCE: Bn . es
ee ~ Document displayed with Header, Body, and Footer zones - -
[ Edit cable Categorize cable Print this cable
{ . .
CATEGORIES: i
[ setprtennecannennnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnn snacacenmacnannnnnnnnnnnnnanennnn mewn ne ante OO OR i
H ROUTE SUBJECT: RESPONSE FOR JFK ASSASSINATION RECORDS COLLECTION ACT /
I ROUTE COMMENTS:
t
| /
f

f
| SECRET 1716482 NOV 95 STAFF
CITE VIENNA 28456

TO: DIRECTOR.

FOR: LIMIT CHIEF/OCC INFO OCC/OSG, CHIEF/PCS, C/EUR/SA, EUR/LGL,
OGC/OSD, OGC/OFLD

| sLues: WNINTEL ee rt eT TTT a

; a

SUBJECT: RESPONSE FOR JFK ASSASSINATION RECORDS COLLECTION ACT

oy

P: fA. DIRECTOR 493642 95 2040015 /

(Be _DIRECTOR 493658 | 95) 2040060
TEXT:
1. ACTION REQUIRED: NONE, FyI.
ee
2.3 ON 14 NOVEMBER 1995, C/O.NOBLEHORSE DELIVERED REF-TEAR LINE- my \

“INFORMATION AS REQUESTED. REF IDEN THEN ASKED FOR TIME TO FORMULATE
“HIS ‘THOUGHTS AND SUBMIT THEM ON PAPER. ALTHOUGH NOBLEHORSE

EXPLAINED THAT WE WOULD PREFER HE PASS THE RESPONSE DIRECTLY TO C/O,
HE WAS APPARENTLY SO ANGERED OVER THE CONTENTS OF REF, THAT HE LATER

i
}

/ / TRIED TO CONTACT BERT MILLS DIRECTLY AND WITHOUT SUCCESS. ON 15 ie
/ / NOVEMBER, REF IDEN PROVIDED THE FOLLOWING RESPONSE IN WRITING, WHICH J /
\ IS BEING POUCHED TO HQS VIA TM 902~825: ee
Wee SOT ee —
Te TT re nn ee me NOV 14, “1995 ~

x) {BERT MILLS}

SECRET


--- Page 44 ---
13-00006

SECRET

I OBJECT VIOLENTLY TO THE REVELATION OF MY NAME REGARDLESS OF
THE LAW. HERE ARE SOME REASONS:

-il.__-I_EMIGRATED 10 {AUSTRIA . TWICE, FIRST_IN 1971_AND AGAIN IN 19832
iBOTH TIMES/T | HAD_TO FILL OUT AND. SWEAR..TO_. LENGTHY FORMS ABOUT MY
--BACKGROUND.._#Z USED MY RETIRED STATE COVER BOTH TIMES, THEREBY +

COMMITTING PERJURY TWICE UNDER_AUSTRIAN LAW. “MY OLD-FRIENDS IN HIGH
“PLACES ‘WHO MIGHT HAVE BEEN_ABLE TO PROTECT ME HAVE ALL RETIRED OR,

EVEN MORE, DIED. ( AUSTRIAN / JUSTICE IS NOTORIOUSLY IMMUTABLE. DO YOU

WANT ME TO GO TO JAIL?

2... LIVING SINCE RETIREMENT’ IN AUSTRIA FROM 1971 TO 1980 AND FROM

(1983 TO THE PRESENT, I HAVE ACHIEVED HIGH POSITIONS IN VIENNA'S
MUSICAL BODIES, BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF THE JOHANN STRAUSS _ SOCIETY AND)
_VICE PRESIDENT OF. rts VIENNA MEN'S SINGING SOCIETY, AND/I AM
“PERSONALLY KNOWN TO/ SEVERAL RECENT AUSTRIAN PRESIDENTS/ MANY
REPORTERS AND RADIO FIGURES. I SUFFERED A DISABLING STROKE IN
DECEMBER 1993 AND MY WIFE AND I, BOTH 75, CAN CONTINUE TO EXIST HERE
BECAUSE OUR 2000 SQ. FT. APARTMENT IS WITHIN WALKING DISTANCE OF 2
POST OFFICES, SEVERAL SMALL SUPER MARKETS, MY FAMILY PHYSICIAN, OUR
DENTIST, MY UROLOGIST, AND AN EYE DOCTOR AND OPTICIAN. WE ARE
WITHIN WHEEL CHAIR DISTANCE OF THE CONCERT HALLS AND THE OPERA.
WHERE CAN YOU DUPLICATE THIS FOR ME?

3../ DURING MY_ ACTIVE CAREER _ IN VIENNA AROUND 1959 I INTERROGATED AND ~
BROKE AN INTELLIGENCE SWINDLER WHO HAD BEEN A NAZI ASSASSIN. ~
PROMISED HIM SECRECY IF HE CONFESSED, BUT THE US ARMY PUT OUT a
(La NOTICE" ON HIM, FORCING HIM TO MOVE TO GERMANY. I AM SURE fee
WOULD_LOVE_TO_FIND ME_. AND--SHOOT ME.

4. ivIENna/ Ts 1 FULL OF ISLAMIC TERRORISTS. THERE HAVE BEEN "SEVERAL
ASSASSINATIONS, EVEN OF A CITY COUNCILMAN, BY THEM IN RECENT YEARS.
UNDER! AUSTRIAN? LAW, I, AS A FOREIGNER, CANNOT EVEN GET A PISTOL
LICENSE. YOU MUST KNOW ABOUT THE KIDNAPPING AND KILLING OF OUR
COLLEAGUES AROUND THE WORLD.

4. I HAVE TWICE TESTIFIED BEFORE HOUSE AND SENATE COMMITTEES ABOUT
THE KENNEDY ASSASSINATION. THEIR FULL REPORTS SIMPLY CALLED ME THE
"DESK OFFICER" AND THAT HAS SEEMED TO SATISFY EVERYONE. NEEDLESS TO
SAY, IF YOU DO EXPOSE MY NAME, I WILL NOT EVER TALK TO ANY
JOURNALISTS OR SO-CALLED HISTORIANS.

5. IF MY NAME IS EXPOSED, I WILL OBVIOUSLY HAVE TO LEAVE VIENNA,
WITH THE WHOLE HOUSE FULL OF FURNITURE, PICTURES, LIBRARY, CLOTHING,
ETC. WHICH I PACKED AND PAID TO HAVE MOVED OVER HERE IN 1983.
BECAUSE OF MY STROKE, I WILL BE UNABLE TO DO ANY PACKING AND THE
MOVE WILL BE VERY EXPENSIVE. WHERE CAN I RESETTLE IN A 2000 SQ FT.
APT. SO CONVENIENTLY LOCATED.

6. MY WIFE AND I LOVE LIVING HERE FOR MANY REASONS, AND LEAVING
WOULD BE A CRUEL AND NEEDLESS FATE.

7. %I REGARD THIS LAW AS DISHONORABLE AND UNWORTHY OF THE UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA. IF YOU DECIDE AGAINST ME, I WANT TO APPEAR
BEFORE THE BOARD AND EVEN THE PRESIDENT, WHOM I HAPPEN TO ADMIRE. I
WILL PAY MY OWN WAY BACK TO DO SO. I SERVED IN WWII AND NEVER
SPARED MYSELF; IN THE OUTFIT I WORKED HARD, WAS FEARLESS IN DEALING
WITH MY SUPERIORS (CORD MEYER AND DICK HELMS CAN TESTIFY TO THAT)
AND MY ADVERSARIES. I WOULDN'T EVEN THINK OF THREATENING TO EXPOSE
THINGS TO PRESSURE YOU. I WILL BE EMPLOYING AN ATTORNEY OR TWO,
FAMILIAR WITH OUR AFFAIRS, TO REPRESENT ME. I WILL NOT DENY, THAT I
CONSIDER YOU AND EVERYONE ELSE IMPLEMENTING THIS LAW TO BE ENGAGING
IN DISHONORABLE CONDUCT, UNWORTHY OF OUR GOVERNMENT SERVICE.

SECRET


--- Page 45 ---
13-00000 |

SECRET

8. 2 IN THE LATE 1960'S WHILE SERVING IN VIENNA UNDER TOM - s

KARAMISSINIS; "WAS ORDERED BY HQ TO REVEAL -TO-AUSTRIAN-MILITAR'
‘LLIGENCE THAT A LOW-RANKING AUSTRIAN DIPLOMAT SERVING AS THEIR

INFORMANT IN BUDAPEST HAD ALSO BEEN RECRUITED BY US AND WAS REPORTI
NG TO US. .I REFUSED TO CARRY OUT THIS ORDER AND OFFERED MY
RESIGNATION. TO ME, IT WAS DISHONORABLE TO BETRAY A YOUNG AGENT WHO
HAD ACCEPTED OUR RECRUITMENT AND PUT FAITH IN OUR PROMISE OF
- SECRECY. TO MY MIND AN AGENCY WITHOUT PRINCIPLES CANNOT SURVIVE AND
INDEED SHOULD NOT SURVIVE. TOM KARAMISSINIS, PERHAPS ONE OF THE
LAST HONORABLE MEN: TO SERVE WITH US IN HIGH POSITION, FIRED A STRONG
LE BACK AND THE SHAMEFUL ORDER WAS RETRACTED.

9. I HAVE INVESTED ABOUT $50,000 IN MY APARTMENT, IN KEY MONEY AND
IMPROVEMENTS I LEAVE, I WILL LOSE ALL OR MOST OF THIS. OUR
LAST MOVE TOJVIENNA} COST ME ABOUT $15,000 IN SEA FREIGHT AND
INSURANCE. I WI NEVER GET ON MY KNEES AND ASK TO BE MADE WHOLE IF
YOU EXPOSE ME, BUT I MAY REPORT TO THE COURTS. I AM A RETIRED
MEMBER OF THE VIRGINIA BAR.

10. LET ME REGALE YOU WITH AN EXAMPLE OF HOW THE HISTORIANS
MINDLESS DRIVE TO KNOW EVERYTHING CAN LEAD TO A PROUD COUNTRY 'S
DISGRACING ITSELF.-4DURING WWII WHEN WE WERE INTERROGATING# MA
POW'S, WE PROMISED h WOULD EVER-LEARN THEY HAD-“SP1:
IR-GUTS, “— ALL BELIEVED WE WERE BEING HONEST. BUT ALMOST
2S YEARS AFTER WWII THE BRITISH DECLASSIFIED ALL THE ADI(K) REPORTS
(THAT'S WHAT THEY WERE CALLED, AND EVEN THE "ROOM CONVERSATIONS, "
TRANSCRIPTS OF THE CONVERSATIONS POWS HAD IN THEIR ROOMS, EVEN

- INCLUDING THE EXTREMELY VALUABLE SPEECHES MADE BY HIGH-RANKING
‘LUFTWAFFE OFFICERS TO THEIR HIGH-RANKING FELLOW POW'S AT
“COCKFOSTERS" MANSION. NEWCOMERS WERE VISITED BY THE OLD HANDS FOR
A MONTH TO MAKE SURE THEY WEREN'T STOOL PIGEONS, BEFORE THEY WERE
GIVEN THE PRIVILEGE OF ADDRESSING THEIR FELLOW OFFICERS ON SOME
IMPORTANT ASPECT OF THE WAR. THE EXCELLENT BRITISH MIKE
ALL UP. :

IN RECENT YEARS, AT LEAST ONE LUFTWAFFE VETERAN ASSOCIATION,
THAT OF J.G.2, THE RICHTHOFEN GESCHWADER, SENT PEOPLE TO LONDON TO
GET COPIES OF THE INTERROGATION REPORTS OF THEIR PILOTS. . THEY DID
IT CHRONOLOGICALLY AND WERE SO SHOCKED AT THE VAST AMOUNT OF VITAL
DATA REVEALED BY THEIR BUDDIES THAT, IN ACUTE REVULSION, THEY
STOPPED LOOKING. I ASSUMED THEN THAT “EVERYONE” HAD “TALKED,” WHICH
IS TRUE. 7

II. I AM 75 YEARS OLD PARTLY PARALYZER ON MY LEFT SIDE -FROM-A
STROKE IN DEC. 1993. I WAS NEARLY FULLY REHABILITATED WHEN, IN MAY

- 1994, I WAS HIT BY CONSTANT MUSCLE SPASMS ALL UP AND DOWN MY LEFT .
SIDE. THIS RATHER RARE CONDITION, BASICALLY A SUDDEN SUPER-HUMAN .
TIGHTENING OF ALL THE MUSCLES, WITH AFTER EFFECTS LASTING. UNTIL THE
NEXT SPASM, HAVE MADE IT INCREASINGLY DIFFICULT FOR ME. TO STAND UP,
WALK, OR EVEN SIT UP FOR VERY LONG. IN A’ FEW DAYS, WHEN ALL THE
MANY MEDICINES ARE HERE, WILL BEGIN A. 20-WEEK HOMEOPATHIC CURE FOR
THE SPASMS UNDER DR. SCHRAMM, A LEADING SPECIALIST HERE. I CAN'T
VERY WELL LEAVE FOR 20 WEEKS.

YOU WILL BE CONTACTED MOMENTARILY BY ONE. OF MY ATTORNEYS. I
_ WILL ALSO BE IN TOUCH WITH MY CONGRESSMAN AND SENATORS.

WITH BITTER RESOLVE,
(SIGNED -- REF B IDEN)

3. REF IDEN HAD ALSO ATTEMPTED TO. PUT THE ABOVE INTO

"CABALESE," BUT BECAME TOO TIRED TO FINISH IT. NONETHELESS, REF
IDEN ALSO REQUESTED THAT THE CONTENTS OF THIS MESSAGE ALSO BE PASSED:

. SECRET


--- Page 46 ---
13-Q0000 ,
SECRET

1. SAW SUBJ IN HIS APT NOV 14. CORDIAL

ee
2. REASONS: SUBJ HAS EMIGRATED PRIVATELY TO/AUSTRIA TWICE, 1971
{AND 1983, USING RETIRED STATE COVER ON SWORN AUSTRIAN FORMS ‘Hus
‘a COMMITTING PERJURY TWICE BY AUSTRIAN LAW: " HIGH OFFICIAL HERE WHO
COVERED FOR HIM Now" DEAD. WOULD FACE * “SCANDAL TRIAL, JAIL, AND

DEPORTATION.

3. SUBJ PROMINENT IN LOCAL MUSIC CIRCLES, RADIO, TV, AND POLITICS
AND MILITARY, GREAT SCANDAL POTENTIAL.

‘4. SUBJ INVESTED 50 THOUSAND DOLLARS IN APT AND WOULD LOSE IT IN
' HURRIED DEPARTURE, PLUS EXPENSE OF MOVING EFFECTS TO 21, AND OWN
FARES.

5. SUBJ NOW 75 HAD CRIPPLING STROKE DEC 93. WIFE ALSO 75 ABLE TO
CARRY ON BECAUSE STORES, DENTIST, DOCTOR, UROLOGIST OF SUBJ, POST
OFFICE ALL IN WALKING DISTANCE OF APT. CANNOT DUPLICATE THIS IN Z1.

6. SUBJ WOULD BE ENDANGERED BY ISLAMIC GROUPS HERE WHO HAVE

ASSASSINATED SEVERAL INCL ONE CITY COUNCILMAN. EMBASSY GETS
'HREATENING PHONE CALLS. ?AS FOREIGNER SUBJ DENIED AUSTRIAN PISTOL i
{ PERMIT. SUBJ ALSO ENDANGERED BY FORMER NAZI ASSASSIN AND INTEL SWI

\ NDLER HE INTERROGATED AND BROKE 25 YEARS AGO, PROMISING HIM SECRECY; /
{BUT US ARMY PUT OUT BURN N NOTICE, _ FORCING NAZI TO MOVE TO GERMANY. ;

7. SUBJ HAS TESTIFIED FULLY BEFORE HOUSE AND SENATE COMMITTEES,
TERMED "DESK OFFICER," OWN ROLE MINOR. ALTHO PUT IN CHARGE OF
AGENCY INVESTIGATION BY HELMS THEN DDO, HIS WORK WAS SABOTAGED BY
ANGLETON WHO WITHHELD HUNDREDS OF BEST FBI REPORTS AND CONFERRED
DAILY WITH FBI WITHOUT PRESENCE OF SUBJ, ALL IN FLAGRANT VIOLATION
OF HELMS ORDERS.

8. SUBJ AVERS HE WILL NEVER THREATEN TO EXPOSE AGENCY. EVEN IF
SURFACED WILL DENY EVERYTHING. *

4.,-FILE:_ 785-120-034.
CL BY: %618711
cL REASON: “15 (C)

DECL ON: Xl
DRV FROM: HUM 4-82.

END OF MESSAGE SECRET

ce:

SECRET


--- Page 47 ---
13-00000. ss: oe :
oo EVES ONLY grey MSS ahi (995
PY ML USE OMY ey

— QA olatly ay “be pk dedin Peettare.
anlar pla pa we adn SoZ.

ml bo L. FH cnet . aa
rs ea

LE pan tee
1903 Bihe prove, DP Aaes aclewire  be

Citrrl G Leen,

am se Aede, Be
pale 2 wegg SE) Gi Pit



--- Page 48 ---
13-00000__. :

| . Atte aerirale SECRET

T 2 INTERNAL USE ONLY
, bitin ofc. Cp Como ul tira, 4

7 pt

een JOR, Betare

.

_ oF pos eral ancl peel
wnt 09 “aie 2

2 PIO en “oe x O yg AF

we t A P ttt jhe. a ee |
dict’ Wor AAS S adlrore. I writl
coll ~ tb deratz DS eevetn WWI

Leg ls wphnantgg Co to


--- Page 49 ---
13-00000

yrefnseate at Les
tee ee, Le dn era

q, of hg moe art eangdrovinn oF Ww
a arent , . - ..



--- Page 50 ---
13-00000

( 2 A antreH “ Ly
ff. nade Cy high rand ara

OF pp TG = Fe de

Nia Him, egy ;

pw rey ey. Aa far elazo , wha. ade :


--- Page 51 ---
13-00000.

| | SECRET “INTERNAL USE ony



--- Page 52 ---
13-00000

SECRET IIa OE ny

p

/ SAW Sul AA WS APT NOV 14, Cok ot =

AK $uUBs HAS PRE LURITIEN PLER 5 3 TO REmA, .
| To AEM Hn Dee coves

2. REASONS! SUBS HAS EMIGRATED », 70 (AUST R/A Tlvice,

P7971 AND (93, AS/NG RETIRED STATE COVER OW

A Si WORN AUSTRIA FORMS 7 THus ¢ COmmirrivG PERJURY
i_TWICE BY YY AUSTRIAN £ At} PUGH OFFICIAL AER who
COVERED FOR Him VOW DEAD, WELELD FARCE SCANDAL
TRIAL, JAIL AND DEPCORTATIW. <

a

3. 6466s PROMINENT IN LalAL MuUSie CIR CL LES

LA DIO, TK nwa POLITICS | Bs
SCANDAL POTEWTIAL,

% SUB) INVESTED 30 THOUbAWD DOLLARS (NW API ANY)
WOKLD Lose rr nN MORRIEO DEPARTURE , PLkKs
EXPENSE OF MOVING EFFEcCTs To Z4 AND OWN FAR Es,

5, SUBs Now 75 HAD CRIPPLING 8 TeUKE DEC 73,

WIFE ACSO 7S” ABLE TO CARRY Ow BECAUSE STORES, ;
UB, Pos OFFICE
ae “ " a ae. We DISTANT 6 ener: a, aNWo 7
Duplicate THts /NW Zz,
6, SUBJ NWOlLLD BE ENDANGERED By ISLAM IE
GRouPs HERE Who MAYER ASSASESINATED

SEVERAL NCL One ery COUN CLL MAY... EmMBpssy
By GETS TYR EA Te FEWING PHONE CALLS “AS FORE 1 6NER

“Sued TREC ES ; AUSTRIAW PISTOL PERMIT; SUBS

(ALSO RP EWOANGERED BY FORMER NAZI :
I DASSHSSIV AND INTEL SWINDLER HE INTERRO—
| GATED AND BROKE 25 YEARS ACE PROMIS{NG /;
F (11M SERECYY BUT ARREPR Us ARMY PUT ‘j
: OuT BURN NOTICE, FORING- WAZ Pe 40 ae,

Ne & E RM. AAS a ee TOSS TIe. soe

Ane MILITARY GREAT

AND SE VATE Comm) 7 TEES | TERMED ’ DEspe
OFFICER. OWN ROLE MINOR, AL THe Pur IN

CHARGE OF AGENCY INVESTIGA
THEN DLO His L/ar TION BY AEL mus


--- Page 53 ---
13-00000

WITH FB/ WITHOUT PESENCE OF SUBS ALL iv
FF LAGRANT VIOLATION OF HELMS ORDERS,

g. SUBS AVERS HE witl NEVER POREATE ren

DENY. EVERY THING .

°

ees

—_—


--- Page 54 ---
13-00000

.

Subj: Gn Scelso testimony

Date: Oct12 TueSun 19961995 18:46 EDT

From. 74030.3022@CompuServe.CoM

x-From: 74030,3022@CompuServe.COM ted dolan)
To: dickkovar@aol.com (Dick Kovar)

Dick, this is what Chuck Briggs requested.

Date: 66-Oct-96 02:36 EBT
From: {The name of this person is unimportant]
Subj: Ex-C1A Agent Adds Fuel to Kennedy Assassination Fire

Ex-CIA Agent Adds Fuel to Kennedy Assassination F ire
By Michael Dorman
(c) 1996, Newsday

The chief CIA investigator of President John F. Kennedy's assassination has
testified that another high CIA official - noted for seeking conspiracies -
disobeyed orders in repeatedly conferring with the Warren Commission shortly
after the murder. The witness also said a colleague once told him that the CIA
official, the iate

James Angleton, “has ties to the Mafia.”

Almost 33 years after the assassination, the identity of the witness, who held
various top-secret CIA jobs, is considered so sensitive that federal authorities
insist on withholding his true name. He is known only by the alias “John
Scelso.”

While Scelso testified before the House Select Committee on Assassinations in
1978, his 192-page testimony was kept secret until now. It has just been sent to
the National Archives by the Assassination Records Review Board, a federal -
agency that screens assassination documents and makes public those that do not
endanger national security.

Sceiso’s testimony, which criticized operations of the CiA, FBI, Secret Service
and other agencies, likely will renew debates, especially among conspiracy
theorists, on the assassination and how it was Investigated.

when Kennedy was assassinated on Nov. 22, 19635, Scelso was chief of aCiA.


--- Page 55 ---
13-00000

38/8/1996 America Online: Dick Kovar Page 1

branch

responsible for operations in Mexico and Central America. Richard Helms, the CIA
chief of clandestine services and later the agency's director, placed Scelso in
charge of the assassination investigation. Angleton, a counterintelligence
official with close ties to FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover, “immediately went

into action to do all the investigating,” Scelso testified, criticizing the

move sharply.

“Helms called a meeting at which Angleton and a Jot of others were present and
told everybody that | was in charge and that no one should have any

conversations with anyone about the Kennedy case without my being present -
which was violated from the word ‘go’ by Angleton, who dealt with the FBI and
the Warren Commission and (warren Cornmission member and former CIA Director
Allen) Dulles himself, ... Angleton ignored Helms’ orders. | tried to get Helms

to make fir obey and Heims said, “You go teil him.”

Angleton, who died in 1987, spent much of his career searching for conspiracies
- believing that there was a Communist mole in the CIA - and was presumed by
other CIA officers to have tried to press a conspiracy theory on the Warren
Commission. The commission found no evidence of a conspiracy. Angleton.was
fired

in 1975. Years later, a mole was found - Aldrich Ames - but he had entered the
CIA after Angleton’s dismissal.

At one point in the 1978 House testimony, committee attorney Michael Goldsmith
asked, “Do you have any reason to belfeve that Angleton might have had ties to
organized crime?”

“Yes,” replied Scelso, who is now retired and lives abroad, government sources
said. He said the Justice Department once asked the CIA to determine the true
names of people holding numbered bank accounts in Panama because the Mafia was
hiding Las Vegas “skim” money there. “We were in an excellent position to do
this and told them so - whereupon Angleton vetoed it and said, ‘That is the
bureau's (FBI's) business.’ ” Sceiso sald he discussed the situation with

another CiA officer. “And he smiled a foxy smile and said, ‘Well, that’s

Angletan’s excuse. The real reason is that Angleton himself has ties to the

Mafia and he would not :

want to doubie-cross them.’ ”

On another subject, Scelso gave Kennedy conspiracy theorists a slight piece of


--- Page 56 ---
13-00000
so 10/8/1996 America Online: Dick Kovar Page 2

arnmunition. A Soviet defector, Yuri Nosenko, was Known to have told
investigators that Lee Harvey Oswald - identified by the Warren Commission as
Kennedy's assassin - was not a Soviet agent. But Scelso said: “| Jater heard
that Nosenko was discovered to have been dissembling, not being on the level.
That information was imparted to me by CIA officers.” —

Based on the information CiA headquarters had on Oswald before the assassination
- chiefiy that he had been in the Marine Corps and defected to the Soviet Union,
then returned - Scelso Said he saw no reason fo pay him special heed. “Oswald
just seemed to me to be a small-potatoes defector,” he said..But he conceded

that significant information about Oswald - known to CIA agents in Mexico City,
for example - had not reached headquarters before the assassination.

It dealt chiefly with Oswald's visits to the Soviet and Cuban embassies In
Mexico City and his attempts to obtain a Cuban visa two months before the.
assassination. Scelso said the information failed to reach Washington because of
simple overwork and bureaucratic delays in the Mexico City office. He revealed
that all the outside telephone lines at the Soviet and Cuban embassies were
tapped by American agents and that calls Oswald made to them were recorded.
After Oswald was arrested, Scelso revealed, agents compared audiotapes made
while he was in custody with the wiretaps and determined that he was the same
man who had visited the embassies,

Distribution:

To: j. dolan » (74030,3022 Dickford Cohn > (76226, 1572]

Tomo manana nnn anne Headers --------------------------------
From 74030.3022@CompuServe.COM Tue Oct 8 18:45:41 1996
Return-Path: 74030,3022@CompuServe.cOM

Received: from ari-img-4.compuserve.com (arl-img-4.compuserve.com
[149.174.217.134]) by eminO9.mail.aol.com (8.6.12/8.6.12) with ESMTP id
SAAI2122 for <dickkovar@aol.com>; Tue, 8 Oct 1996 18:45:40 -0400
Received: by arl-img-4.compuserve.com (8.6, 10/5.950515)

