
--- Page 1 ---
hr04-10333-10006 [2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
i : CT re

Bore oe 7
| CLASSIFIED FAX
TRANSMISSION

From: Michelle Combs
Subject: DS&T and DO Briefing Questions

COMMENTS:
‘Barry, ~

Attached are the final versions of the DS&T and DO briefing questions, There are no changes in
the DS&T questions, Questions have been added to the DO list to reflect our conversation
March 19 and 20. You, of course, already have our detailed explanations for the earlier DO
questions. If you have any questions or if there are any problems, please give me a call. I should
be in all day. See you tomorrow,

Michelle


--- Page 2 ---
13-00000 foe

+. MAR 31°97 12:05PM P.4
4. yoy : . ,

1 s . q

Questions for Follow-up DO Records Briefing
April 1, 1997

1, At what point did the DDP begin to keep records of destroyed records? For
example, in a Cold Warrior footnote, Tom Mangold reports that as any of Angleton’s
files were destroyed, "a complete record was carefully maintained about what had been
done. (George) Kalaris signed off on every file and the DCI’s office was notified."

(p. 143) Where are these records?

2. Could an archival search be run on specific topics for retired records at the CIA's
Record‘s Center? Perhaps an ARRB staffer could be present during the search to review
the abstracts and to suggest other fields or topics to be searched?

3. Could a crypt search for records containing relevant crypts be run through
cryptographic reference? How would queries need to be framed and stated?

4. Why is it so difficult to develop a list for all personnel (official, contract,
administrative, or TDY) assigned to the post referenced in RIF 104-10065-10199 from
1959-1964?

5. We have been working to identify all technical and surveillance operations in and on
the Cuban and Soviet consulates and embassies in Mexico City between September 1
and December 1, 1963. How can we frame a search query to determine if we have a
comprehensive and complete list of all operations at that time?

6. How can a search query be framed to document all electronic take produced by the
Mexico City Station in the immediate wake of the assassination (the first month) and
during the period of Oswald’s visit? How can we verify that what exists in the
Sequestered Collection represents all records of the technical production that was
available at the time of the assassination? If additional records or original production
still exists, where would it be stored or filed? What searches could be conducted to
retrieve any additional records? If such electronic take has been destroyed, do records
exist of the destruction?

. % Could you describe the process by which operational funds are proposed, approved,
received, and distributed (circa 1963). What funding and disbursement records exist?
How are they organized? How should a request be formulated to institute a reasonable
search of these records?


--- Page 3 ---
13-00000

"-

~ MAR 31°97 12:G5PM

4 oY 1
, 1 :

8. We have seen DDP monthly operational reports which contain information on the
allocation/distribution of operational funds. Are there other DDP records which would
reflect how certain projects utilized their funding? How are these records organized?
How should a search query be framed?

9. Various open sources have linked the CIA to various journalists and publishing
companies during the 1960's. How should a query be framed to search for connections
between the Agency and journalists or publishing companies?

10. Did the Agency have any relationship, projects, or contacts with publishing houses
during the time of the assassination and in the aftermath of the Warren Commission?
How would a search be formulated to determine whether or not the Agency had a
relationship with any of the same publishing houses that were also publishing books
about the assassination?

11. How would a query be framed to search for files on any office or person dealing
with organized crime and Cuba? How should a request be formulated to institute a
reasonable search on this topic?

12. Is there a comprehensive record or list detailing the identities of individuals on the
feragency gister? How are these records organized? How can a search

be framed to ascertain whether or not a particular individual appears in the

_ 13. How could a search query be framed to ascertain whether or not a particular
individual was given access to classified information by DCD (then OO)? What kind of

files are assembled in the process of Clearing non-Agency contacts/sources for access to
classified information?

14. ARRB’s Request for Additional Information and Record No. CIA-13, dated
November 1, 1996, contained the following questions:

A. What forms of backchannel communications were there between the
Mexico City Station (including the COS), JMWAVE, or Headquarters
during 1963? By “backchannel” we mean, inter alia, any administrative,
senior staff, or restricted access communications, or any written or
electronic communications other than regular cables or dispatches (of the
type included in the JFK Collection).

B. Were there, in fact, any backchannel communications between the Mexico

City Station (including the COS), JMWAVE, or Headquarters during the
time periods 27 Sept - 16 Oct 1963 and 22 Nov - 30 Nov 1963?

2


--- Page 4 ---
13-00000..-

‘

- MAR 31°97 12:06PM _ P.6

* Y t

C.. To the extent that there were any backchannel communications for the
time periods 27 Sept - 16 Oct 1963 and 22 Nov - 30 Nov 1963 (other than
those currently contained in the JFK Collection), please make such records
available for review.

Why has it been so difficult to answer these questions?

15. ARRB’s Request for Additional Information and Record No. ClA-14,dated
December 23, 1996, documented our request for the annual or biannual Station reports
for Mexico City Station for 1963 and 1964. Why has it been so difficult to provide these
reports?

16. The attached Agency document released in 1996 contains the paragraph:
11. A memorandum marked only for file, 16 March 1967, signed M.D.
Stevens, says that J. Monroe SULLIVAN, #280207, was granted a covert
security approval on 10 December 1962 so that he could be used in Project
QKENCHANT. (Clay) Shaw has # 402897-A.
What do these numbers mean? What does the “A” at the ends of Shaw’s number
signify? - Do the files identified by these numbers still exist? Why was Sullivan granted
a covert security approval?
17. During the period 1959-1963, what was the purpose or goal of QKENCHANT?

18. Under what circumstances were non-agency employees given covert security
clearances for the QKENCHANT project?

19. Did Clay Shaw receive a covert security approval for the QKENCHANT project?

Why was one needed? Did Clay Shaw receive covert security clearances for any
project other than QKENCHANT

20. What did Clay Shaw do within the QKENCHANT project?

21. Do records exist to account for the disposition of all files on Clay Shaw?

22. Did Howard Hunt have any involvement with the OQKENCHANT project prior to
1964?

23. Did J. Monroe Sullivan have any involvement with the QKENCHANT project prior
to 1964?


--- Page 5 ---
- ” MAR 31 '°97 12:@6PM

SECRET

SECRET |

24, The DO telephone directories list an Operational Services /Defector Staff beginning
in October 1959? What was the Defector Staff? Did it have an operational component?

25. In the period 1959-1964, were DO officers, selected to serve overseas under State. —_
(Department cover; legally considered to be “members of the Foreign’Service, appointed ,
(by the President with the advice and consent of the Senate?" _- —-—~-..--—---—._. Va

SECRET

SECRET


--- Page 6 ---
sabi

Mak pleon cos orl apnn de

SUBJECTs Clay Ly enaw (201-813493).

1. . Subject was born on 17 March 1913 in New Orleans,

Loulieiana. '

2. Standard background information on subject ‘
(parents, marital etatue, records of education and
amployment, eto.) 4s lacking beacause SHAW was a contact
of the Domestic Contact Service.

3. Traces on Subject hava been run in RID/Main
Index, the index of the Office of Security and tha -
Central Cover Staff. The first showed only a 1951 FHI
interview with SHAW about a former employes of tha New,
Orleans International Trade Mart. Tha second showed
that 00/Contacts Division had requested a name trace ;

“about 1949 and that the check of FBI records then aon-

ducted was negativa, Central Cover Staff shad no xecord.

4. Some of the 00-B reports basad on SHAW's
reporting ara on hand. They are the following. (It
de noted that the source desoription identifies the
‘source by job titla.)

‘a. ©O0-B 47958, 26 March 1952, concaxrna
a letter written to the publia relations
diractor of the International Trade
Mart by one Dr, Jutta SCHALLER, a trade
conaultant to the Ronn Government. The

. letter 4a a follow-up of discusaions held
tt in Now Orleans during Decerbar 1951. The
< letter said that Soviet production and
X * export trado were nd advertised and

é ) Document (30. 49.9 -¥

2f for FOIA Review on’
e wer UEC 1977

aa

gt stucady fue.

rte Adak u Fou abt

oe . ei cal ncn ) fim gi elvertnnr
enmeroncr enmeezecnsn Kno m
wwe neat Enclosure 21 on swolulad «px reel


--- Page 7 ---
13-00000

hee

a

ee ta
¥ t

"WR BA '97 12OTP ®t, wees

- . :
ng ry

promoted by West German money. Tha
wblication Wer Liefert Was?, published
n taipzig,. Ie now also being published
din Hamburg, ata price mich lower than
competitive volumes,
b, 00-B-9381, 27 Decdmber 1548. Information
“* a 18 Dacembex 1948. SHAW (identified
by job title) has agreed to lease to the
CSR government 1,000, fact of apace for a
dLep ay of merchandise in New Orleans. The
ease s for one year, starting 1 April

GB. 00-B-4933-49, 14 Juna 1949, information
@ate late April and early May 1949. Rasults
of a trip SHAW made in March through, May
1949 in West Indies, Central Aearica, and
Northern, Séuth Amorica. —

@. 00-B-4934-49, 14 June 1949, same general
subject and‘ background as above.

@. 00-B~4935-49, 14 June 1949, as above.

£. , 00-B=35477,°29 June 1951. Results of a
BHAW txip in 1981 in Central and South
America and the Caribbean araa,

5. On 9 May 1961 Ganexal C. P. Cabell, than DDCI,
addressed tha Foreign Policy Association of New Orleans,
It is believad that he was introduced by Clay SUAW.

6, On 3 March: 1967 the Washington Star reported
that Garrison had arrested SHAW and had made public
charges that SHAN, FERRIE, OSWALD, and others had plotted
the assassination in the apartment of FERRIEZ at 3300
Louiaiana Parkway, New Orleans. SHAW hag said ‘that he
never saw OSWALD. ta denies having used the name Clay
BERTRAND, Jack.S. MARTIN aaid that FERRIE had mentioned

P.9


--- Page 8 ---
13-00000.,

NAR 31 ’97 12:08PM Hote _ Lo.

SKAW to him. J.. Monroe SULLIVAN, executive director of
the San Francisco World ‘Trada Centex, told the Associated
Preas that SHAW was in San Francisco and touring the
Canter with him on tha day of the agaasaination. SHAW,
now xetired, was formexly the managing director of the
International Trade Mart in New Orleans. He is S4 years
old. Ramaey Clark, U.S. Attormey Ganeral, said that the
PBI had investigated SHAW late in 1963. “On the evidsnce
that the FBI hag, there wag no connection found" with the
aspsaseination. .

7. UWamorandum No. 84-67, 3 March 1967, from Chief,
Maw Orleans Office, to Director, Domestic Contact Sarvice,

a. The first contact of the New Orleans office
of the DCS with Clay SHAW occurred in
December 1948. A nama check raquest waa

‘ gaturned “no info"-on 23 March 1949. SHAW
was contacted by Mr. Runter Laake of tha
New Orleans office saven times in 1949,
twice in 1950, fiva times in 1951, nine
timas in 1952, onca in 1953, twice in 1954,
twice in 1955, and twice in 1956. SHAW
is the source of eight 00~B reports sub-
mitted by tha New Orlaans office. At one
time he had the "Y" number 145.1. The ~~
last contact took placa on 25 May 1956
On 23 January 1967 Jack §. MARTIN phoned
the New Orleans office, said that he was
working on an important undexcover deal

. for. Garrison and Detective Loule IVON,

and wae calling at IVON's request. ia was
culling to ask the head of the CIA offica
to telephone IVON on his unlisted number.
No such call was made. The writer, Lloyd
A. Ray, enka that the General Counsel be
‘informad and that he provide advice.

6. Undated and unsigned memorandum {probably
produced by CI/R & A). The following additional infor~
mation was provided by the Naw Orleans office of DCS.

arpces
° Sti :



--- Page 9 ---
P.11

‘ 7 cay . :
Since 25 May 1956 Mr.[Hombamsheiitiihad sean SHAY casvally, —

m0 by ohenca, ix various déwuntown Raw Orleons, reataurante, + -
. and .graatings: were exchanged. - The, last such cazual
. 71.) | aneounter. wan -jus¢ before Stats ratdrenont in 1965.

° ... De ,On 7 -Mavch 1967 Feaves poblichad en asticle
at *  (eatled "Clay Shaw of ‘tho Fass ~datalined “Roms, 6 Herch
toa . 1967, wedtten by Vi YERNAKOV, Tas article charged that. >
eo, CIA nade. usa ofthe services of Clay Elli for CIA's can
" intorants in Italy, tha Pyhvda piece rotus thet tha-DA
. ~ dn'Now Oxtqana da accusing BIA of paxticipstion in tha.,-
me acuassination’ conaplracy. It cays SHAN spaht "aemy yonrs"
ta _ da Yom an a World Prade Canter Taadaxz. It claims thet
ane a the Contox.was. a cover. for finanoing antipCommunine actiyity.
: CIA gava diyectives Go SUMAN, Tho Noxld Trads Cantor was :

a . Switzerland openly scoussd of ‘orimin21 oporations'...."
ara (Coneants “IG, appaars that. el) of tha Eravde charges. are
'  %..  Amtema,-Ozcapt that thera was a CIA-SUAW Salstionship. 84

?

“ "0 110." 2 amoxandun “fron, o @ Merch

. :, 1967: pubjocks - Jealion Apgdots of tho Clay Shay Affate,

a . The Coselags- dalla: Sha af. 5. Horch 1567 hoe Sn aktlets . . :
Ft ft .ehaut Saat, ~adegedinntion, ond.tho,World.fzeda Contes: =.
Contains: no sdldvant information.,  - “os

A mamosandum marked only for fia, 16 Mazch 1967,
J ektayons, bayd, that J. Konzon SUZLIVAN, §280267,
was gtantad 4 covort sceurity aoproval on 10 Fecanbos, 1962
wo that, Govld ba ysed in Project qNevcHaNT. sUAW has -

. te * : ee eo. ; : . .

ele. of 8 aby cnemozandom fron PROD ME De perPRO RT 21 Hageh

Co, 1967... Gubjedts ‘Sexace ts an, Perrone onnested with
. ‘a

. . ‘tra jonginiea. Comtaxciale" (orld tscoda Centers), filed
4 + BH foldex, Clay SHAW ~-working popoxzo. = |. ”
ft : . a“. . : o. .



--- Page 10 ---
13- 00000 — ;
a * MBSE. 12:09PM 1 [e : ors . P.12
4

eta mel odit
1
{

Cue “sce Same fag e-,

es Bo ae | o0tem a

ry . . +

“; .. ‘
sinea.25 May 1956 Ke. ‘Muntar- Leake had seen sua casually,
by chanca, in various downtown New Orleans xestaurants,

and greetings were axchanged. The last such casual
@noounter was just bafora SHAW's retirement in 1965.

ee 9. On 7 March 1967 Pravda published an artiola -
ealled “Clay Shaw of. the CYA" datalined Rome, 6 Maxch
. ¢ 1967, written by V. YSRMAKOV, The article charged that.

. CLA mada use of the services of Clay SNAW for-CIA's own
interests 4n Italy, The Pravda pleoe notes that the DA
in New Orleans is accusing SHAW. of participation in tha
assassination conspiracy. It says SHAW spent “sone exe”
in Rome ag a forld Trade Canter leader. It clains
the Center was ‘a cover:for finanaing anti-Comaunist notivity.
CIA gave directives to SHAW. ‘The World Trade Canter was
a branch of “Permidax" (sic), "which the Newapapaxs in
Switserland openly accused of ‘oriminal operations’....°
(Comment: It appears that all of the Pravda charges ara
witrue, axcapt: that there was a CIA-SHAW ralationship. So
far aa is known, SHAW was naver asked to use his ralation—

: ship with the World Trade Canter for alandestine purposes
. and, in fact, ha has not been in Italy.)

. . 10. Memorandum from C/EUR/ZI to C/CI/R & A, 8 March
1967 subjact:. Italian Aspects of the Clay Shaw Affair.

The Corriere delia Sera of 5 March 1967 has an artiole
about SHAW, tha Gssasaination, and the World Trade Center.
Contains no relavant information.

. “11. A matorendwn marked only for file, 16 Haroh 1967,
dhgnaa M.D. Stavans, gays that J. Monroe SULLIVAN, #280207,
was granted.a covert sacurity approval.on 10 Dacembex 1962
49 that he ‘could be usad in Project CIENCHANT. SHAW hag

402097~a. .

‘ 12. Mamorandum from C/EUR/I to C/CI/R & A, 24 March |

_ 1967,. Subjects “Trace Results on Persons Connected with
Centra Mondiale Commarciala® (World Txade Center), filed
CI/R'G A folders Clay ‘SHAW - working papers, ©

fees. _-
on



--- Page 11 ---
13-00000
a MAR 31 ’97 12:05PM _ - P13
‘ we nepaceucen Ar We ITOH, AO {f . oS . - . .

a -

_ . i , } oyere7 eaten at | ‘ my
. . ! pare GT. .

. ory

: i. . loa . oh
@. The 5: March 1967 issue of 11 Meseaggerq
links SHAW with the World Tradé”Center. Bae
Othara linked to the canter wore traced,
with resulta roported in this. mamorandum, .
No‘ ralationship to the Garrison invastigation
‘appears hore. A raport on "Pexmidex”", a
Swise corporation with principal offices .
in Rome, is also in the file beacause the

asgociated. Agnin, thore i» no information .
here which relates significantly to tha
case Garkison ia trying to build in New

Orleans.. | co,

“13. The Washington Fost, Outiook, 2 April 1967,
“Saaking Truth in New. OrIeans the Middle of the
Night", Geoxge Lardnar, Jr. : :

a. Garrison's mon droya ROSSO to SHAW's
Franch Quarter homa, RUSSO posed aa a
Mutual of Omoha ealesman. He knocked at
doors SHAW answered. . RUSSO said that he
was Clem BERTRAND. .

World Trade Centar and Permidex are

oa ‘ .
. : b. SIIAW ig a Sd-year 01d bachelor ‘and
aye ‘ socialite who pioneered tha 33-story

. International Trade Mart in New Orleans.

He was subpoenaad by Garrison's office
on 1 Maxch 1967. According to his friends,

‘his questionere did not advise him of his

’ rights, They told him they had avidence

of a meeting with FERRIEZ and OSWALO.
There was a fuse ‘and SIJAW was arrested -
and booked on conspiracy to murder JPK.

_That night Garrison's man raided SHAW's
apartment and confizeated whips, ohains,
a black net cap, a cape and hood. RUSSO
told reporters that he did not know Clay
SHAW, but he identified the man arrested
by Garrison as Clam BERTRAND.

!

hoses -
tase. i

Tate ee wet e


--- Page 12 ---
13-00000 _- .
‘Mr, Onaxes. No; I think in each eage it will depend so much on the situation _ (Commission Exhibit No. O85 , ’ sae”
- evidence) was marked for identification and recetved| tm _

with the particular person. If @ person comes in and ho is very iigitated or .. . . ee eee
_tamething of that Kind, it taleht Aletate a totally different approach Chan a diiter- woe reomiative Fenn When Oswald eame heck on N Ser 8,1 - ae
Mr. Dvtize, Wouldo't it be weefal though to give—I don't want to suggest Mr, Coumean. Mr: Gum nl estoner, ” rh tg
“My what the Secretary of State should de in this, hut in the light of this expert ~ merely ‘wrote a Jotter. Honer, ho Gidl not come backs an November: 8. Ho
\ ence, would there net be some Veneto in giving porrie in the Sel the Mr. Cuayes, Wrotea letter. Ho never came beck. ; * :
5 Fox. Are-ali of the employees,
Mr. Cuarsa. Well, the general approach, and other matters related to it, end .the others who kad any.
wy are touched on in orientation courses for consular officers and so oo. I think area, were any. firsthand contact. with the Omwil? eqee.to this
Ay as f look on Coneul Snyder's actions, that he bebaved very much like a respon- Mr, Oiaxns, Yea, sir; these twp ‘men. who saly
atble Foreign Service officer. ; bin) divectty, 1 think the mecretary, their 1
Xd That happened long before I was in the Department, eo I can say that to do with him except aa a reveptionist. "Theee two.men
ty without any involvement. - But it seemed to me that ve tokio ae at ice officers aid are now Foreign Beryicg a
should ave done, despite: b ettermn shows t me, a : For In the strictest ty
Yeast, that the training and. orientation that these people are getting is right, iz .Mr. Quarka Yea, De nes em 3
4) N} \ ‘secvictabie, and’ thiy are able to handle these sttxations as they-ccme ~ ' President with the advice and consent of the fan : et 5
NaN -- My, Ducts, -I realise’ thet you ought not ¢o preseribe hard and: fast rules, mm Rogresentattve Fox, Could you, tell ue in:a.bit moro detall ttis process that
xX. 8 a ae nen eee chethor 2 g7od desl of expericoce banat besa But L you followed cr the procpdire that you carried out w you first: got into the
raise.the question as to whether a good experience hamn' gained Oswald casa. * - oe carried when rr
iN |p, i'adeetee in nat vor aoe . ° . re . You mentlened-yesterday yo . te
Yh -” Mr, Garena Well, it may very well be that more attention to that particular the Becretury of State ar bY somekeds te Mighes ete oe 2 betions
\ aspect should be ‘given ta fhe arientation courses and fo on. Those things Wh yon tell us whe eilled you, what you did in the first 8 or 4 Gage? ia stepa.
SK tant reflect what in hot at the en eer an maybe not to ot " galit Omsctzs. Tt was the evening of the Gay, perhaps about 5 ¢clock ‘ni the
: trouble avith something for a pretty time, it tends -day of the axenssination. It may have been ‘somewhat earter, becatise I think
A S Nv sgtan pe at Ooaia tut yonaed tat ay, Ose, tn x remember I went heme fin Boe then came beck fo exizy oxt Gals
vy \ maniiing the form that is a prerequisite mder your definition for reamnciation, - a defectar—— ( ne at that Oswald ‘had eune history as
3 ‘would Snyder have been required to give it to him and permit him to sign it? - Mr. Durtes, ig the . D.& Loe
RAG cals Settee et St veer aes mabe recom Mt, Gt, He rs tng Scryer of Bat
‘ was open was was ag you recall icifie, . Ov Aathin Des
QR )} thet Onwala was competent, he woald bave to give bim the farm, yes, ee. But over = he had boon the Usdor Beoretaty hes te ae cine eae Secretary,
K Yaa et eeemelceg te Snider. ave tie enihery oe Penrecentative Foun. Ho still kad some authority. . to,
a - Cuares. Ye she ¥ ae. oe . .
GS \ Mr Usarms. No; he doen't have the anthority to make a determination of on Onwald, and io prepare a report to be methine fee Mee aneriment
\ § cera ity come cane out pba Sane wan marning éoveriog at beste. could within that time span. the oto in the
court. . think a ‘consular officer would probably ing within pwald ‘Departrient. . vor na: the contacts the
AS @lecretion if he saw sumbody who was drunk or raving or something and Just We got the passport fle, Wo got the security offie fila. We got the eyecia) -
N \(§ said cite, Tam not going give you this tatllT am eure that your action is TOUANST fervices fio which covered Mrs. Ovwali's viea and ths, repatriation
your After all; when the consol accepta the oath, be ts certify loan: * I-think those three files the oni ; i"
X is the aet of the pereon in a meaningful eense, and so if he thought that the there was a smaller fourth fla Puli thinkrthoet thee Wee trocar may have been
N © -person was incompetent, I think he would have discretion not to give the oath, . Representative Yos2. What would thatemallerfourthflebe? -  - .
. ‘ @ But I put that for acide bocatse in the particular ease Mr. Snyder made it Mr, Onarzs. I can’t remember. It wis duplicates if it was exything. Oh, that
s\ \ perfectiy clear that he had no reason to doubt that Oswald was fa right, we bed a visa file end an BOB fils so those were the four’ The BOB
: \ And go if Oswald had been there at a time when‘the dffice was open, or had file, thet is Special Consular Services.in the office, in the Burean of
y {y returned at a time when the office was open, and bad persisted in his demand, and Consuler-Affair, = - : - ‘ { Beemxity
WY 1 think Snyder would bare been uader an obligation to ve him she tore Representative For You got this order on or it 8 otto: te 224 of

i

have denied Oswald the right thet day was the fact that it was on a

Satarday, @ non-working-hour period of the Eimbasny. Bepresentative

Fur,’ And you tarued orders to have thee files brought ‘
yourself? : files broght in,

Mr, Cuaves. Yea; I think ho had every right to try to dissuade him, or per- or did you go and get them .
goade him not to act or perinade him to think ft over and come back the next . My, Cuarm. No. . . : ’ tee,
dsy. But if after alt of that. Oswald stil had'said “But I want to do it now” .  Bepresentitive Foxn, Or what happened? - State + em lou»
and if the office was open for business, then I think he woald have bad to do it. Mr, Quaves. I issued orders to have them an
Mr. Duzzxa. I think it might be useful if ft has not beed done ' te think how we got them, to Mr. Hiriich} Did you godewn and ,~
af thig point ad an exhibit the form of oath of renunciation... Here is the for- get them? -Mr. Ehrlich and my we worked Dd
OD cama Toma be well to have this in var two of them went down tf don’t think we fot called wre the tae ae
itis oar records, * ; wen to ge. them. I don’t think
* Representative Foun, I agree. © . . phone and aeked them to be ap. ‘We fout ealled over.th teto- e
. Ms, Commi, No; it tant. Conld we ‘say it will be marked as Commission - (Dieenssion oft the record.) Looe tea te
Exntitt Re and place this aticker on that’page, photostat and then Just a CHAINS 3 1d my recollection that one of these two gehflemen,-either 4


--- Page 13 ---
13-00000

(genet LE gio og,
a ae fd, dP PP fad 6h ofa



--- Page 14 ---
13-00000 rine 24 soe tsar

~ oe,
“FAX TRANSMISSION

Fax #: 703-613-3060 Pages: 3, including this cover sheet.
From: Michelle Combs :
Subject: DO Briefing Questions

. COMMENTS:

We may add additional questions but this should give you an idea of the topics. Have a good
weekend. :

Sh 7
Ore ve ou machwrs
ho Me qsshars : Mes
Gunn crecee&) We (wz

Rebun



--- Page 15 ---
13-00000 .--rer ier on,

2 DRAFT

Types of Questions for Follow-up | DO Records Briefing
"— Maich 17, 1997

ne id offon every file and the DCTs office was notified.”

h be run on specific topics for retired records at the CIA’s
staffe 'be.present during the search to review
sgest other fiélds or topics td be searched?

hot eos cnining relevant cops ber through “yy
Flow would series neod to be femines ad stata:

to ldentiy all technical and surveillance operations in end on
eee ee cents iy Mend iy between Sebipmber
sk sreincipenetemi na hr meme

6. Ho can a search ry be framed to document all electronic take produced by the
mediate wake of thé: assassination (the fist month) and

Seq ollection | represents all records of the technical production thatwas

available at the time of the assassination? If additional records or original production

still exists, where would it be stored or filed? What searches could be conducted to

retrievi any é addition recorda? If such electronic take has been destroyed, do records
the «

7. Could you describe the process by which operational funds are proposed, approved,
received, and distributed (circa 1963), What funding and disbursement records exist?
How are they organized? How should.a request be formulated to institute a reasonable
search of these records?

DRAFT


--- Page 16 ---
13-00000 war 14 -g7 3e0 ann

ore

wo

a DRAFT

8. We have seen DDP monthly operational reports which contain information on the
allocation /distribution of operational funds. Are there other DDP records which would
reflect how certain projects utilized their funding? How are these records organized?
How should a search query be framed?

9. Various open sources have linked the CIA to various journalists and publishing
companies during the 1960's. How should a query be framed to search for connections
between the Agency and journalists or publishing companies? .

10. Did the Agency have any relationship, projects, or contacts with publishing houses
during the time of the assassination and in the aftermath of the Warren Commission?
How would a search be formulated to determine whether or not the Agency had a
relationship with any of the same publishing houses that were also Publishing books
about the assassination? ;

11. How would a query be framed to search for files on any office or person desling
with organized crime and Cuba? How should a request be formulated to institute a
reasonable search on this topic?

12. Is there. a.comprehensive record or list detailing the identities of individuals on the

‘antetae egister? How are these records organized? How can a search
query e framed to ascertain whether or not a particular individual appears in the
Register,”

13. How could a search query be framed to ascertain whether or not a particular
individual was given access to classified information by DCD (then OO)? What kind of
files are assembled in the process of clearing non-Agency contacts/sources for access to
classified information?

DRAFT ~=



--- Page 17 ---
Assassination Records Review Board
600 E Street NW « 2nd Floor. e Washington, DC 20530
(202) 724-0088 « Fax: (202) 724-0457

SECRET
MEMORANDUM —
March 18, 1997
70: John Pereira and Barry Harrelson

FROM: Jeremy Gunn

SUBJECT: ARRB Questions Submitted for DO Briefing

I would like to address some of the concerns that you expressed at ouir meeting
yesterday, where wé briefly discussed the Review Board’s Proposed Questions for the
March 17 bilefing regarding DO records. We understand that you have some concerns
about the scope of the topics raised. We very much appreciate your recognition of the
importance that we attach to the ARRB’s independence and we again wish to
emphasize the fact that we fully understand your proper concern for the protection of ,
information that is unrelated to the Kennedy assassination.

Lwould like to to eimphasize that the questions that we sent to you were not intended as in
f ch queries, but rather as topical talking points for discussion. We prepared
ve tions, at your reqitést, in order to give the persons conducting the,briefing an
unders' ding of the types of issues in which we were interested. They represent issues
that We wish to explore'in out quest for additional information and records;to facilitate
the completion. of thé ARRB’s 8 responsibilities under the JFK Act.

We appreciate your acknowledgment ti that the ARRB is not necessarily obligated to
justify: to CIA the questions it deents relevant to the-assassination. Nevertheless, in
order to facilitate and coordinate our efforts, we are very willing to offer the following
additional explication of those questions that we ‘understand may have been considered
by. the: ‘Agency to be excessively broad.

SECRET

Bongo Memnenat John A. Tunhalm, Chalr « « Henry F. Graff « Kermit L. Hall William L. Joyce » Anna K. Nelson
: Executive DIRECTOR: David G. Marwell:

me


--- Page 18 ---
13-00000

SECRET

Question # 5:
We have been working to identify all technical and surveillance operations in and.on the
Cuban and Soviet consulates and embassies in Mexico City between September 1 and
December 1, 1963. How can we frame a search query to determine if wehavea |
comprehensive and complete list of all operations at that time?

Until very recently, we had seen no evidence that CIA had microphone surveillance'of
the Cuban compound. However, Dispatch HMMW 12454 (no IDEN number attached) ©
found in Box 23, Folder 9 of the Sequestered Collection, makes reference to LICOOLs
(concealed microphones inside the Cuban Embassy in Mexico City), Though the
dispatch reports that the last LICOOL ceased functioning in 1961--before the period in
question--the prior existence of this capability and the fact that the dispatch discusses
the possibility of reactivation prompts the question of whether all technical and’

_ surveillance operations against the Cuban and Soviet Consulates have been identified

to the ARRB. In addition, the dispatch refers to MKTRAP, a telephone hot mike
operation w! was re-actuated from a basehouse in November 1963. The specific hot
mike telephone(P’ E appears to have been in operation during 1963. Are there
records from this operation? Are there any other operations that may have picked up
Oswald's visit?

Question #6:

_ How -can a search query. be framed to document all electronic take produced by the
Mexico City Station in the immediate wake of the assassination (the first month) and
during the period of Oswald’s visit? How can we verify that what exists in the
Sequestered Collection represents all records of technical production that were available
at the time of the assassination? If additional records or original production still exists,
where would it be stored or filed? What searches could be conducted to retrieve any
additional records? If such electronic take has been destroyed, do records exiet of the
destruction?

This question is a follow up to question #5, If MKTRAP was in operation from
September 1-December 1, 1963, where are the records or transcripts describing the take?
Was the take ever retained or reviewed? Do any original tapes or transcripts still exist?
Where might these records be found? Were any other technical operations in progress?
The various project files for the technical operations known to exist during this period
are spotty and incomplete. How can the ARRB know if it has reviewed records of all
the technical operation take for the relevant time period?

SECRET


--- Page 19 ---
13-00000

MAR 18 ‘97 @6:S4PM P.S

SECRET

Question # 9:
Various Open sources have linked the CIA to various journalists and publishing
companies during the 1960's. How could a query be framed to search for connections
between the Agency and journalists or publishing companies?

The two 1967 Ramparts articles mention connections between the Agency and
Journalists worldwide. The primary focus of this question is on any connection between
and any journalist who might have covered the assassination domestically.
Addisonatly, we would be interested in any publishing company involved in *
publishing books about the assassination. HSCA staff notes (RIF 180-10142-10087)
summarize several files dealing with contacts between the Agency, pub: houses,
and authors. For example, the file identified as ‘QKOPERA Liaison’ ZRBLESS outlines
] /PROP on the status of negotiations between’
Praeger Publis d Milovan ‘Djilas. ZRBLESS is identified as a subproject of
WUBONBON. Further, the staff notes mention a project involving ‘Praegerjand
publication" [sic], a separate project involving "the Freedom Fund and distribution"

[sic], and: a third project to provide news service to the foreign press through
(Continental. Press! Bach of these projects appears to have been in operation in 1963-64.

- Question # 10:

Did the Agency have any relationship, projects or contacts with publishing houses .
during the time of the assassination and in the aftermath of the Warren Commission?
How would a search be formulated to determine whether or not the Agency had a
relationship with any of the saine publishing houses that were also publishing books
about the assassination?

This question is a follow up to question #9. One record that is already in the collection
(RIF 180-10142-10087) summarizes the Project File of WUPUNDIT and notes two ‘one
time only’ operations in 1963-WURAISIN and WUTRANSIT which were responsible
for publishing two books each. In addition, WUSENDER is reported to be a ‘one time
only’ operation responsible for three books in 1964. If these books have domestic
implications or are on subjects related to the assassination, they would be relevant
documents.

We hope that this additional explication may help you and the DO understand our
approach to the issues raised in our questions. Should any of our requests impose on
you or your staff a burden that we may not have anticipated ~.or which would entail
work of dubious value or benefit -- please advise us so that we can work with you to
modify or amend the requests accordingly.

SECRET


--- Page 20 ---
13-00000 MR 18 *97 ess . : . ; P.4

~

. SE Es
Please also remember that, when we request accesses to these materials, we are not
designating them “assassination records” and we are not, at this time, requesting that
copies of documents be given to the Review Board.

_ We appreciate your continuing cooperation and helpfulness.

SECRET


--- Page 21 ---
- : ~Stattingalian meg. PRISE ACT
p I 5 P A T C { | secret a] MARE vere

© 1
ae OOS, Mexico City | WO INDERING REQUIRED
iy , bobceen

OMY QUALIFIED Oete,
CAN USGE WnOd alas

ee seater nn eee oes =

70M

omg bets Pavsston -
PORUMEN _LIFEAT/LERORE. Gontwaten An Uae of Cryptonym

QeTON REQUIRED. DETLEENCED—~*°

MICRO

ee See NE

. 1, ‘The Station's use of certain cryptonyas Adentifying technical
operations agaiaact. PRRUNEN TPELIQE {n Mexico has caused confusion ia

: Headjuarters laments responsible for sourcing and dissemination of

\"da¥ormation produced; and Yor ‘supporting the entire complex of

Operations itself,’ The cryptotyms in question are (a) LIFEAT

_ (2) LIZRODE (c) MKTRAP (d) LICQOL/11 and (e) PBIMPULSE. The original. |
meaning of these cryptohyna 4g being forwarded under separate cover.

:. 2, ‘The purpose of this dispatch js to subsit for Station comment
- review of, the technical operafional effort against PPRUMEN TPELIDE.
-@inee ita inception. The objectives are (1) to complete Headqyarterg

records which lack ‘considerable detail concerning the intriaaGies of .
the operation, (2) to urgd.« more precise use of cryptonyna in- 1
reporting this activity which would benefit Headquarters personnel
responsible for monitoring and supporting those ‘operations and (3) to
suggest, & fev administrative adjuatnents which would dispel the presend
confusion mentioned in this dispatch, . .

3. The indttal effort against the target was PBIMPULSE. It was
introduced into the target using LIFEAT assets and was actuated from
the LIFEAT VX basehouse, Thie ie mentionad only to complete the recor¢
and does not pertain to the intent of this discussion. Proparly
speaking the initial effort begins with the activation of LIFEAT/
LYERODK in February 1959, aa indicated in 12358, Subsequently
eight (8) LICnor, attempta were made during 1960-1961 against the aaue
target, The LICOOLs were uonitored from a mobile LP (not LIFINE},
Basehouse ABLE and Banehouge BAKER, und the latter came to be referred
to as the LIERODE base, The most productive operation of this zort
goems to have been LICOOL/11, activated on 9 Nsy 1959, according to
WEXI 3884, dated 15. May 1959. According to. our records the last L1C0O!
ceamed functioning during late 1961. Please confirm.

Attacbrent - u/s/c

Distribution
0&1 ~ COS, Noxico City w/att
e

OIEPATCH GYMAOL AND NUMBER

HUW 12454

CLASSIFICATION.

SECRET

oFres. e
WH/3 /Mexico/L e
COCLNATING

OFFICE SYMBOL CO ONICERE NAME

RI

Chrono °
TSN/ASD
TSD/Photo

ee

pF PES |
ATCH

FO 53 use encvious gorrion

ree s9 97 essen Se gipecteradallittion Box 23, Fole* I


--- Page 22 ---
P.7

CONTINUATION CF.
DISPATCH

wee en ee ee a
7

briefly outlines the development of the oporations which the St
habitually refera.to as “MRTRAP" t pe . * Station

* § February 1962; Request for operation received at.
MKCRARITY by Harvey C. MULFORD, 7” :

8 Feb,lar,1962;. Design and construction of MKTRAP.

QO March 1962 : MKXTRAP dolivered to LIFEAT CO for
placeaent in target area. .

. .

* "Jo March 1062 : METRAP ingtalled by LIFSAT assata snd"
. initial LP teste perforsed from LIFEAT VI bagehouse
-with negative results, .

. mei
14. March 1962. : LP teats conducted with revised serie
line connections with positive results.” . a

6-13 April 1962; Design and construction of LP equipaent,

16 April 1962. ; installaction of LP equipment in
LIFEAT YY basehouse. :

MKTRAP, ‘although moved from room to roon, remained in Place within

the target area, though inactive most of the time, During November
1963 METRAP was re-actuated from a second LIFEAT basehouse know as

Basetouse CHARLIE,

activity for which the cryptonym was firat authorized have all been

Headquarters. :

6, According to scanty Meadquarter's records the fellewing
operations have utilized these bases against the target:

‘ a," PRIMPULSE LIFEAT VI
“&. LICoaLs Basebouses ABLE and DYER
©. LYFEAT/LIERODE SMAFEAT VE
“a. “xOSYRAP™ LIFEAT ‘VI, Basehouse

e. PHOTO . Basehouse BAKER

Hoadquarters has the impression that the principal factora that

contributed to the suspengaion of NKTRAP activity from LIYEAT VI,. were
the physical deterioration of the house itself and the divorce of the
paschouse keepers, The curren

LYFEUD 14 add LIFRUD 17 wore obtaining « divorce and were terminated

of LIFEAT VI, yet the project outline does not show that the base was
closed, “LYFEAT VI was listed‘on page 20 of the outline as an’ active
and-LIFEUD 23 are occupying the "LIEROSE photo basehouse", but that
‘they have never been involved in.LIFEAT work. This indicates that
LIFEAT/LISROQE and the photo work against the PBRUMEN target are now
being conducted from two different basehouses. The project outline
alao indicates that while it had been planaed to have this base serve

4.. At that tino a different technique was plaoood, The followin:

S, The photo aurveillance of PRRUMEN TPELIDE was put into effect,
using basehouce BAEFR (LIRAODR Rare) at the same tiwe that MKTRAP was |
actuated. Thie photo coverage, the basehouse, PSRUMEN TPRLIDE and the,

identified aa LIKRODE which has created considerable confusion here at

BAEER, Busehouse CHARLIE

t LIFYEAT Project Qytline indicates that .|

as of 30 September 1962. Meadquarters asaumes they were the occupants

dt, On the other ‘hand, page 15 of the outline states that LIFEUD 22

— 7 T 7 Staseirie aeiaw PACE NG.
ronm .
aan A a


--- Page 23 ---
13-00000

é . ? P.8

UISFATEN SYNGSL ANG NUMELA

. rf .
mo. ATONOF | POK:. [te te4s
te ae 7 | Wane 12484 -

i _ .
i ULIFEAT/ERYRAP”, technical difficultios made this imposaible,

7. therefore these two agents were not being includod under LIFEAT

i Project.. Whon MKTRAP was ‘re-actuated in Novomber 1063 and as stated
a] above, the Station utilized anothor LMrEAT banvhouse, also valléa

: _ basohouse CHARLIF, situated approximately six nilon from target. .
fe Please confira the accuracy of the foregoing and supplement it by
de ‘ dnforaing Headquarters tho basehousea-and keepers involved and the
:¢],., operations they are currently nontitoring. us

of 7. Headquarters requedts ‘Station's comments on the following .
suggestions: tet . vote

a. Photographic coveragé, That a separate project be
| prepared ta-Include LYFEUD 22 and 23. The project should .
cover their salaries, basehouse rent, and equipmdnt

j expenses, an arrangeuent similar to LITABBY and LIDOGTROT.
| Thie activity, identified with a new cryptonym would ee

i)

A

i

i

!

coverage Of PARUMEN TPELIDE.

b. LICOOL. Headquarters is not aware of any LICOCLs |
presently operative. If any are contemplated, CSI-52-6, 27 ©
Fetruary 1958, requires special Headquartors approval prior
to any action taken, If Buccessful, a decision can be made
at that tine wheather a new project ia necessary or whether
it can adequately be covered undor LIFEAT, depending on
the assets being utilized in the operation.

eliminate. further confusion vheu discussing photograp! 3S"

\ co. LIBRODR. The original intent of thie cryptonym is
: discusse& e waparate cover attachment and the activity

o in th
. hag bean agsipned file sunber 50-6-32/6. If the operation
.f utiiizes LIFEAT assets, it is suggested that it remain.

be identified as LIFEAT/LIZRODS ia

under LIFEAT Project and
of the aseets

all cprrespondence. Please inform Haadquartera
presently used for LIFEAT/LIERODE coverage. -

@. MRTRAP. XURIOT would prefer the Station. not use this
eryptonym in reporting this particular type of coverage. It
im suggested that a new cryptonyn, in the LI geries, be :
utilized te reference thia activity. The present cryptonyn

_ Fetters to a technique which hasprogreased from the : .
developaental into the operational stage and should more
appropriately he identified with a regular Station cryptonym.
If this operation ig being worked by LIFEAT asuete, thon
it aight be identified with a dual cryptonys LIFEAT/LI. A
separate file number, Within the LIFEAT series, can be
assigned to cover “HKTRAP" if the Station requestd it, but
1t does not seen necessary since othor LIPZAT targets do, not

have separate file nunbera either, - :

: e. Consolidated Project. If the Station prefers, all

‘ technical operations - LYSRODE, MKTRAP, LICOOL, PUOTO =

: directed against PRRUMEN TPELIDE can be funded and
adainigtered under one project. :

i
. \

OLIVER G, GALDOND

a yee dale
OS Cary

mr ee mre
eCiasiricayion

PASE RO

[lemm ls

cannes, eee se acme tae Seen anes

ORM
SIN soa + usc rasvices ceiriom.

aan

' eee eee ae oe et ee nt Pe eee


--- Page 24 ---
Qe

P.g

ATTACHMENT TO
WuNW 12454

CRYPTORYM A = ‘usbd to identify Station's unilateral telophone
ene tape.
ry 1959, to identify the

CRYPTONYN B - Aumsigned of
TO Station's } ’  {etepnone tap of the
! PSRUMEN TYPE in Mexico ‘City, (See ‘ee

MEXI 3382, Febriiary 21, 1959) .

pot

CRYPTONYM C - Identified the: technical nomanclature of a
a hot mike ¢elepioné AJ& inetellation. Details
of the. system are contained in HEMA 20307,

“GRYPTONYM D ~ Concealed microphonas,
CRYPTONYH B ~ Hot nike telephone.

ge "O- 244

CROCE PO Nl race CS COPY


--- Page 25 ---
13-0000 wer 18°97 ab:S7RH ee)

. 9709-16-960cr-

Cross Reference: wone
Stetus in Syston:

RECORD NUMBER : 380-10142-10087
Regimes) GERIES : CIA SEGREGATED COLLECTION
FILE NUMBER 23-06-03

‘
e
1 THE. WARREN COMMISSION AND MEXICO
‘ 90/00/78 : Se
262.)
t RESORT
8 MEXICO; WC) eza, PILES)
CLASSIFICATION ' UNCLASSIFIED
RESTRICTIONS «¢ 3 a.
cuaREnT STATUA ¢ 7
DATE or LAST REVIEW 1 5
, COMMENTS 4 Li

pace ts on/adyse


--- Page 26 ---
WARR:
PESIOO

ps3) pees
SD). - pop PAS EAN WEL



--- Page 27 ---
—“—=—‘“‘“‘<; ©!

AR 18 ’97 @6:58PM

a OO a ee



--- Page 28 ---
13-00000

bak 18 ‘97 @6:58PM . . P.13



--- Page 29 ---
13-00000

9 “97 ostsoem 4/3} 2¥#

HARD UAY

5 ohh Ako PeR A Ags.
Yat &/ 25/0 . |

4. ee oct} . ZR BLESS fers
a lgeypek “hfe 1 -


--- Page 30 ---
13-00000

4/3/2¢
HMAROWAY

SRE heh.
wae G/26l0% Asnenrtos Kho .

rns a Dom Lerch ..
Prongek Oction berwecletil
glaelin wee. Gers Sas, OK 0 I

; AAR MLS IIS. OD 45,000 dele, ak
eer (943 (Yate) Aer (9.4. CJensd..
lj Mam chee 3/17/44. Ka DOP.

[Somes <| L
Xe + £2,000

dd

we ); | d ol oe SPEIRS


--- Page 31 ---
13-00000



--- Page 32 ---
} 18 iad @7:aaPr" eae f . ;
| in |: wae Hurt . BLUIAMARY

' Haccluoe

[dete ate Whe

a fe wees ~ 7, Ber A , .

a. F AUGER SRT] Teemimatkions a
folder I, Bex | ee

[Su Fe vows s -{ ud Tea]
[WW TRAMs arg pore eee
Fee
Sts ee:

eeu MATOS) owe. Mens thins onl “
AM. (2641. a Vor: Sz. NBzER}

SAATEARQ

ls


--- Page 33 ---
13-00000

F WU Bon Bon J

; pres EB of , _

&.| WU Boron Jfecountings Foteler 24
f ro oo |

4. MES. Project File.

t

Gs

eel

a
’


--- Page 34 ---
13-00000

feo Se ee ced per bad”
||. Reeariole oy Bk Age ees

EPS

SUPLIGA HT 3cpecch. Seldea a |
4.1 “iki wh Borwars\| Sell er 2e

| DY USUR GaN | AesDegmenk Dla  F/2
Ho] WU Rarwon.]} Pah man Pagans ez.

14 Wiueumorr } CUR Book Poblishivg
. =. ZEtey.

(2 DOU. BowBar> | FY Os Pan
a 2 FRI

74 KaB PUNO. Jugasosion |Se PRest
F DSB+42]2-2

