
--- Page 1 ---
14,006

104-10219-10754 .. [2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT ‘JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 | :

-HEMOQANDUM FOR: Director
tiational Security Asency
ATTENTION t Hr. Benson suffiaa.
Sef-r 8s B3 0
SUsJcCT : Osiitian nasilton Martin aad bornon Ferguson

Kiteaally,-sg4 3357

1. Attached is a copy of o report recently received through
Canadiana liuisoa channels conceraizg a coaversation betwosn
Canadian professor Dr. iians Aunov and Martin in Moscow. Tae
attachxent outlines the conversation Kunoy had with Nartin’ and-
dudicates: that. both. Martin. and Hitcaell are attempting. to lcave
the JsSR. :

ee pee ne eee cee ncn ee

. 2. Also attached is a report on Yuriy lgoryevich Torgey %/-Ofb2ay
_ Kunov’s host at the USSR.Acadeny of sciences Corputer Center.

, .. .3. The Canadians have advised us that the FBI has ‘received
tho information contained in the actachients. | :

F02 THE DEPUTY DIRLCTOR FOR OPEAATLONS:

“Bagrca h ietaety
George 7. Xalaris

| Attachwents;
i ie _ As stated

. COORDINATION:
DOO/CI/REA/L:W.Kerbe:dnj (12/12/75) ;
Distribution: rena

Arig @ 1 - Addee w/att. | bees

sieasieeerear rs atic pt ene oa

Paul L. Rinaldo
7DIVD/TCS in draft

12 hae ff715—)

_ » CRewo wfatt 1- pivo/tcs ° al = 2§2 535° —
> B- Wi- as 27 # . o ent! (Z : oe ve
B21 888% 397 ASECREY paars OEE

ian

Sranntesensesns!

Wine ican tect meneame He



--- Page 2 ---
1400000 +

RET a

Dr. Be KURIOV or Sey Univer.

re roa

On Sevtember 3 while having 2 coffee break in the Computer
‘Centre KUNOY was aporoached by a man who identified himself as -
William MARTTI, an’ American who defected to the U3SR in 1950, MARTIN
openly spoke about his past and stated that he now lives in Moscow
and that he is a consultant to TURGOY's group at the Computer

Centre. He said much of his work is done at ‘home but he does drop
into the Centre weekly.

It was at this time that MARTIN told KUNOV that he would
Ike to get out of the USSR even if he has to run certain risks. He
also said that (Bernon) MITCHELL feels the same and has voiced his. -
desire to the Soviet authorities. ‘

cae seen conten emanate

toy : MARTIN asked KUNOV if he might enquire with the Canadian

; » -@uthorities on his behalf to see what his status would be in this

Hy country or if there was any chance of his being allowed in here as

{ a political refugee. KUNOV agreed to contact the Canadian Embassy
io in'Foscow to see what the official view would be and notify MARTIH
ata later date. MARTIN seemed most pleased at this and left KUNOY
his heme télephona number, cautioning him not to say anything over
hone that would tiv off the Soviet authorities as to his intentions.
his first: meeting lasted a little over one half hour and took place
in the coffee lounge area of the Centre. There were other Sovicts
present in the lounse, however, TORGCY was not among them. KUNOV does
not believe the others were. aware of their conversation.

On the .5 September 75 KUNOV called at the Canadian Embassy,

Moscow and spoxe to a doorman asking him who he might speak to
-regarding sone Americans living in the USSR who would like to immigrate
to Canada. The doorman referred KUNOY to the office of a Mrs. Louise
O'COHLGR. KUUOV ther sroke to a U/l who stated that he was the
under secretary to Mrs. O'CONNOR. KUOV enguired about the Americans
living in the USSR and asked could they be allowed to immigrate to
Canada. The Embassy official would not ommit himself and stated that
“KUNOV should enouire officially with the nearest office of Manpower

'. ahd Immigration when he returned to Canada. KUIOV did not give this
official MARTI or NITCHELL's names. KUIOY telephoned MARTIN after
the Eabassy visit and stated that the revly from the Embassy was
negative. MARTIN seemed upset that KUNOY should phone him, then he

' later stated that it would probably be all right.-

. - MARTIN met. KUNOV on at least tto occasions after the
5 September, all at the Centre, usually in the coffee lounge and in
the general. presence of others. They szoke English at all times.
’ MARTIN thanked KUNCY for his trouble in enquiring at the Embassy and
- cautioned KUNOV not to get personally involved with him in this
venture 2s. it would be bad news. XUOY oromised MARTIN that he would
check with Canadian lanpower and Immigration authorities on. tne
“~ gatter when he returned to Canada emp Co -
Jo WRG Ee

wee le .



--- Page 3 ---
(a)

7 (v)

(c)

(4)

aN

- The fol.wing observations were ma.. by KUNOT
regarding MARTIN: fo, .

Physical. Description

5'7' or 3" tall, fair hair, crexcut,
temples, pct deliied. .

~ my suffer from 2 nervous condition,
Ho has experienced rough tines.
with a shirt, tie and jacket.
English with a slighy Russian accent
on certain words.

mark of 2 man. ¥

~ always dressed
= spoke perfect

MARTIN provided KUNOV
and telephone number,
telephone was bugged.
~ telephone number —

117421 Obrucheva Street

Building 4-1
Apt. 12
Moscow, USSR

MARTIN stated that hi
Leningrad and is marr
Conservatory in Leningrad.
and he has openly as
permission to leave Russia and
pparently he hes never been
Soviet way of life and is now
NITCHELL is willing to divorce his
risk to get, out of
been met with a wa

BARTIN is unmarried.
apartment and feels that he
. eoted in the USSR..
return’to the- USA. but. would like to ce
He said he would have uit
Life in Russia as
about telli

‘life and is acc

no compunctions

MARTIN at one po

MARTIN claims that he is constantly
officials. His apartment has been broke
several occasions and he refused to use
.system. He has also refused
past as a form of protest.
he has had several contacts ¥:
and that they have not shown any a
. He actually dated an American woman f
_ did not mention her name.

- authorities.
door and talk:

palding at the

and bears the

with the following home address ©
cautioning him that his ~ :

s friend MITCHELL lives in

ted to the Dean of the Husic
MITCHELL is very unhappy
ked Soviet authorities for
return to the USA.
adjust to the
very Cosreratee

wife. and take any
fo date hoavever
ll of silence by the Sovicts.

He claims to have a confortable
has adjusted to the Soviet
He does not want %o
% out of the USSR.
tell about his
past and that he vould nave
ng all abcut the Russians.
int stated that he would not consider

attempting to escape from the USSR.

e a story to
well as his

harrassed by Soviet © —
the Soviet mail ©
for werk in the
MARTIN also indicated that
ith Americans in Moscow.
ninosity towerds hin. ;
or some time but -

MARTIN stated that in the past American journalists *.
have tried.to conta
views but their rea

ct: him many times, asking for inter-"
ests have been. refused by.2ussian -.
id_he* hoped some ¢2
Se Pe i 0. t.O just

Nealige #0

vy that.cne: oi ..
these journalists v knock on nis

jpn eran meni otra a


--- Page 4 ---
rao0bdo

Beet ULV
_PORGCV and KUNOY szoeke “in géneral terms about, MARTIN
-after the first meeting. TO2COY does not clain to know ZARTIN
well. MAPTIN has been at the centre for approximately 6 to 3
months assigned to TORGOV's zrouDd. Prior to that he worked as a
consultant £n anotier area oF tne Academy of Sciences. TORGOY
commented that !427TIa. does rach of his work at hone. =e said
he felt. sorry for !ARTIN because he was not acceoted by the
Russians. in the Academy. He also stated that. he felt MARTIN was
a basically tnest mn. Te

. . -KUEOY said his motives for trying to assist MARTIN
and MITCHELL are: based. on hwinatarien grounds, only,.as he feels
they are suffering under the Soviet system. He does not. intend
to take any further action to assist them in leaving the Soviet
Union, KUNOV hopes to return to the Soviet Union next year for

a more extended period of study.

we 5 tee ae

This docemect ty the“ preverty of the Sovereest ef
© Gioee: Ie peated oe cording that it is fr ez scle}y
fe te latelligecce coasucity cl ts meeeivizg Eorracest ”
fo WE ect bs Gettssitind sitkort tha eapitss porisdize
ef Gsitorersvest ef Censda, :

le geese daroset at le prepitié © dorrersemed 01
Cased, 0 ost erezorigst wens tftene Cutitisatica par les
gots “ainlces dy neaselgeenucts be quveseniet torutctre
ob fa cocttion gut ca tile és ccutlib oe. al ps
eoSGle: ns, Veatacttation...erpressa a. gesversenect anfta,


--- Page 5 ---
1400000

we . : spent, ro Meee easy mayen tent

, 7 . . oO ~ SEC Rey toorvevich TerGoVv
_ BURGOV, CB 6 vunc, 193% Virebsk, USSR, Head of Lab--
‘ oratory, Computer Centre, Academy of Sciences, Moscow, was a
visiting professor in Toronto and Ottawa, Canada, for four
. months - November 1974 to.February 1975. ,

. A number; of. sources. were impressed by TORGOV’s: frank=
ness and his willingness to speak out, at social gatherings,
on current problem arcas in the Soviet systes. For example
he discussed dissidents in Soviet society and commented on one
occasion that: present. day Soviet society allowed for far greater
' £reedom of expression than had been allowed previously. He
said that things were being said in Moscow that one would never
have heard in Stalin's era. Nevertheless, TCRGOV argued that
a. return to “terror tactics” under Soviet rule was always poss-
_ ible. He considered that such tactics were unlikely at this
time because of the personal philosophy of Premier Leonid BRESHHEV.

TORGOV is reported to be the son of a scientist and party
tember and he himself is an admitted party member, He is married
with three children. He is considered to. be one of the top ex-
perts on his field (computers) in the Soviet Union. He mentioned
-having ;travelled to other Western countries two or three times.
Bis English is good. He was very friendly towards Canadians dur-
ing his’ visit but it.was observed that he did not associate with
three other Soviet research students at the same institution. On
' ony occasion in Ottawa he was berated quite severely by a Soviet . .
Embassy official for his failure to report periodically, ‘as re- i
quired, to the Enbassy. TORGOV later told a source that this En- ‘
bassy official. “could be a dangerous.man to your country"... :

ct

& &
cf, Med UR ect be dectasstied eithoct the exyess pered:tis
ef the Gorerexent of Comte.

Ue ofseet doxecet et be propiitt dy goreenenect
Carte, Best coaemtigng mas risene Sotiiccticn gar ies
“! geals cents. G2 ceouelgtemerts ds gsuversenest -desticctiite

GDB condition gee so este ts sésciité oe soll pas
ocSEite seas Mevtsrisation exresse 2 orrerteect crude,

- - SECRET


--- Page 6 ---
veoon0 FG re toe . Pos : ; . i

. : ™~ . , ~
: ate ~ The RCMP Liaison Office
Po : oN 2450 Masepchusettm tua. WY,
: . \ Washington, D.C. Z508
} : . . -
— &
ae U8/75/539 . <¢ a .
: 3 7SWLO-118-36 © : 2 December 1975
: BECRET:

Mr. George Kelaris
cin tae Cole .

Dear

Rer William Hamilton MARFIN, and
Bernon Ferguson MITCHELL

: Purther to your letter of 6 October 1975, we have
igentified and spoken to the Canadian professor, Dr; Kans
_ EUHOV, referred to in your letter as Harry KERNOV, The
poo ' attachment cutlines the contact batwean KUNOV and MARTIN
H ‘and MITCHZLL, KUNOV has proven co-operative as a source
on previous occasions and we believe he will continue to
aseist us within limite. ‘

Also attached is.a report on Yuriy Igoryevich
TORGOV, KUNOV's host at the USSR Acadeny of Sciences -
Computer Centar, In addition to any comments you may
wish to make concerning MARTIN's approaches to KUNOV,
we would welcoaa an assessment of TORGOV, if available.

Tha F.B.1. has received the information con-
tained in the attachments, :

Yours truly,

'ELR.J. Miller,
Assistant Liaison Officer.

Comerst of


--- Page 7 ---
1400000 +

oom  UbuiiEE

“Ret WH. MARTIN and 3.7. MITC LL

t . Dr. Hans KUNOV vrofessor, University of Toronto, visited
Moscow from Seotember 1-14, 1975 to undertake research at the USSR
Academy of Sciences, under the U3SR/Cane?a General =xchange —

Agreement. The research was carried out at the icademy. of Sciences

personality sketch is attached. | :

On Sevtember 3 while having a coffee break in the Computer
Centre KUNCY was apvroached by a man who identified himself as
William MARTIN, an American who defected.to the USS2 in 1959. MARTIN
openly spoke about his past and stated that he now lives in Moscow
and that he is a consultant to TURGOY's group at the Computer
Centre. He said much of his work is done at home but he does drop
into the Centre weekly. .

toe cee weir anne ee soneen ss mune SRR. EMTS IE,

. Te was at this time that MARTTI told KUNOV that he would
tke to get out of the USSR even if he has to run certain risks. He
also said that (Bernon) MITCHILL reels the same and has voiced his
‘desire to the Soviet authorities.

MARTIN asked KUNCV if he might enquire with the Canadian
authorities on his behalf to see what his status would be in this
country or if there was any chance of: his being allowed in here as
a@ political refugee. KUNOV arreed to contact the Canadian Embassy
in Moscow to see what the official view would be and notify MARTIN
at a later date. MARTIN seemed most pleased at this and left KUNCY
his home telephone numoer, cautioning hin not to say anything over

hone that would tiv off the Soviet authorities as to nis intentions.

first meeting lasted a little over one half hour and tcok place
in the coffee lounge area..of the.Centre.. There were other Soviets
present -in the lounge, however, TORGOY was not among them. KUNOV does
not believe the others were aware of their conversation.

On ‘the 5 Sevtember 75 KUNOV called at the Canadian Embassy,
Moscow and spoke. to a doorman asking hin who he might soeak to
regarding sone Americans living in the USSR who would like to immigrate
to Canada. The doorman referred KUNOV to the office of a irs. Louise
- O'CONNGR, KUNOV then spoke to a U/il who stated that he was the
». under secretary to Mrs. O'CONNCR. KUNOV enquired about the Americans
“living in the USSR and asked could they be allowed to: immigrate to
~ Canada. The Embassy official would not omit himself and stated that,
KUNOV. should enquire officially with the nearest office of Manpower
and Immigration when he returned to Canada. KUNOV did not cive this
, official MARTIN or MITCHSLL's names. -KUNOV telephoned MARTE! after
the Embassy visit and stated that the revly from the =mbassy was
negative. MARTIN seemed upset that KUNOY should phone him, then he
later stated that it would vrobably be all right. :

. MARTIN met KUNOV on at least two occasions after the
5 September, all at the Centre, usually in the coffee lounge and in
the general presence of. others. They snoxe English at all times.
MARTIN thanked KUNOV for his trouble in enquiring at the Enbassy and
cautioned KUNOY not to get personally involved with him in this -
venture as it would be bad news. KUNOV vromised MARTIN that he would
. eheck.with Canadian Manpower and Immigration authorities cn the
matter when he returned to -Canzés

CEPeeT

ter an

mu i
ei GN aan

Shean Restate wee



--- Page 8 ---
ULUIiEI

oo

mo,

Tne collowiag coturvations wers made by EUUOV

z
Hi
a
ba

i. ‘regarding MARTIN: : - Loe

=“ -

sn eee commen cammans of .

(a) Physical Descriotion
. 5'7' or 3" tall, fair hair, crewcut, balding at the
temples, pot bellied. — ; :
- may suffer from a nervous condition, and bears the
mark of a man who has experienced rough times.
= always dressed with.a shirt, tie and jacket. oo
= spoke perfect, English with a slight ‘Russian accent
on certain words. . te :

fa ere a tact re ie

(b). MARTIN provided KUMOV with the follcwing home address
and telezhone number, cauticning hin that his
_» telephone was bugged. :
= telephone number — 433-03-81  ..
117421 Obrucheva Street -

Building 4-1 ;
Apt. 12
Moscow, USS:

(c) MARTIN stated that his friend MITCHELL lives in
. eningrad and is married to the Dean of the Music
Conservatory in Leningrad. MITCHELL is very unhappy
and he has openly asked Soviet authorities for —
-pormission to leave Russia and retusn to the USA.
Apparentiy he has never been able to adjust to the
_ Soviet way of life and is now very desperate. .
NITCHELL.is. willing to divorce his wife. and take any
risk.to get out of the USSR. To date however he has
been met with a wall of silence by the Soviets.

Loe a ne RO NO oo a Vstene e —s
a emammee sess:

Ad). MARTIN is. unmarried. He claims to have a confortable
"apartment and feels that he has adjusted.to the Soviet
“life and tg accezted in the USSR. He does not want to

return to the USA but would like to get out of the USSR. -
- He said he would have quite a story to tell about his.
life: in Pussia as well.as his past and that he wuld have .
= RO compunctions about telling all about the. Russians. H
‘MARTIN at one point stated that he would not ‘consider
- - attempting to escape from the USSR. oo

d

- (e) MARTIN claims that.he is constantly harrassed by Soviet |
. officials. His apartment has been broken into on 4
several occasions and he refused to use the Soviet mail }

“system. He: has also refused to: show up for work in the :
past as a form of protest. MARTIN also indicated that

- he has had several contacts with Americans in Moscow

. and. that they have not. shovn any animosity tovards hin.

“ He actually dated an American woman for some tine but.

didnot nention her name. ° . . . .



--- Page 9 ---
14-0000 +

‘months assigned to...
‘consultant in.another area. of tie academy of Sclences. TOAGOV

esserancnnatines a a a BASEN

‘ond Goccoert ta ttn peep the. Eoremmet

eG ADAM oct Be Miassified -mchoet Be. onpress porcisslia -
“gh tbs Eoueraoest Gaal, - ~

eo PORGOV ant UNO spoke in general terms about MARTIN
&tter the first meetinz. TORGOY does not claim to know MARTIN
well. MARTIN has been at the centre for aporoxizazely 6 to 3
“2507's. group. . Prior to that he worked as a

commented that MASTIS does much’ of his work at home. He. said
he felt sorry for !427TIN because he was not accepted oy the

Russians in the Academy. He also stated that he felt MARTIN was

a basically honest mane .

a KUNOV said his motives for trying to assist FARTIN
and MITCHELL are based on huninatarian grounds, only, as he feels
they are suffering » nader the Soviet system.. He does not intend
to take any further action to assist them in leaving the Soviet

. Union. KUNGY hopes to return to the Soviet Union next year for

a more extended period of studye-- - . = 7-

Gears This porte ow ceediboe tat hls tar se IC)
“ty the * ntehigere coenerity ef (Oe vreceidag boeractel

te péeect Gavocet ast ba pretith “ts. gocrerceseed. ¢
Qerate, BD cst ceatestad soos sheen Sititvaties gar tes
tests: senses ca cemmelgaeoests fi qeamracgeel Galatia |
Gt B ty cocGuce ce sa cote. ee - setuid so ed pe
Jeetfide tens Vearisitoa qipreng é geoenemtst comb



--- Page 10 ---
14200000

= wiswese °

Re: Yuriy Igoryevich TORGOV
~ . : 7

"*moRGOV, DOB 6 June, 1932 Vitebsk, USSR, Head of Lab-

_ oratory, Computer Centre, Academy of Sciences, Moscow, was a

visiting professor in Toronto and Ottawa, Canada, for four
months - November 1974 to February 1975. _ co,

; . A number of sources were impressed by TORGOV's frank-
ress and his..willingness. to speak out, at social gatherings, |
on current problem areas’ in- the Soviet: system. Por example
he discussed dissidents in Soviet society and commented on one
éccasion that present day Soviet society allowed for far greater
~ £geedom of expression.than had been ‘allowed previously. He
Said that things ‘were: being-said in Moscow that one would never
. Rave heard in Stalin's era. Nevertheless, TORGOV. argued that”
&Yeturn to “terror tactics® under Soviet rule was always poss-
fle. He considered that such tactics were unlikely at this
tine ‘because of the personal philosophy of Premier’ Leonid BRESHNEV.

TORGOV is reported to be the son of a scientist and party
member and he himself is an admitted party member. He is:married
with three children. He is considered to be one of the top ex-
perts on his field (computers) in the Soviet Union, He mentioned
having. travelled to other Western countries two or three times.
‘His English is good. He was very friendly towards Canadians dur-
“sh¢ his visit but it was observed that he did not associate with
threecther Soviet research students at the ‘same institution. On
one occasion in Ottawa he was berated quite séverely by a Soviet
Bhbassy official for his failure to report periodically, as re-
qaired, to’ the Embassy. TORGOV later told a source that this Em-
bassy official "could be a dangerous man to your country”.

cetdie a Pan

Tis Greumet bs Ge proverty of «= hs Covermnest of
Cosette providsds: a cerita that i ts tor use: setciy.
ty Go: bteligencs comavety ct Ue. mecaisieg Coverasect
208 7B cct be deureiind witkect Ga upers peels
od Ge tovemment of Cosrda.

de pbsert doormat est la prepiaé ty geremeaect
Pema, Best commutiged ares riserna Catdication © par, les

Ls, Sdaty eances 2 ctoseignamests és gonnermard dastc-tine

“Tet Dh ecdtion que sa cola do sizer co. salll pas
otis ats" (evtirtaston ugrassa ds gurerezment ceubes,



--- Page 11 ---
14-0900 3

el oe 5955

, Dear Harry,

- furnished no further details regarding Kernov's contact.

"Seoutd. supply any basic background naterial on Mitchell and Martin,
Wilkinson replicd that he would pass Farrow's request on to

-.. given an. unclassified article concerning the defectors which
: @ppeared in the June 1961 issue of True magazine. .

-dnformation has been passed to us informally. :

Me. Harry Brandes

'_... Distribution:

. US/7$/539
. 1
i

. t

We have learned that on the evening of 8 September 1975, .
James WILKINSON of the U.S. Embassy in oscow had a conversation
ef. interest with a Canadian Embassy Officer.. Wilkinson stated
that while attending a social function at the Australian Embassy,
he engaged Canadian Consular Officer Geoffrey FARROW in conver-
gation. Farrow advised that he had been. recently approached by
Dr. Harry KERNUV, an Associate Professor of English at the

Martin and Mitchell permission to emigrate to Canada. Farrow

‘During the sane conversation Farrow asked Wilkinson 1f he

the Consular Section of the Enbassy, Subsequently, [arrow was

We would, of course, be interested in any indications that
Martin and Mitchell are attenpting to. leave the. USSR.and would
be grateful for any information you may be able to provide us
in regard to the above. : 4 ;

I amusing the CAZAB channel in this instance as this

Yours,

George T. Kolatg
,,.., George T. Kalaris

DDO/CI/R&A/T:LHWigren(20ct75) -

Orig. & 1 - Addee oo
“1 = 165-2720 oY
1 - Reading File ~

ARNE OD che T EN EH aE

