
--- Page 1 ---
ron

104-10165~19004) . | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992

. .e wo

se _— ™ - Ne
REDRT 4

On Friday. 19 June. departed “iami for Kingston. Jeauaica via
- Pan American. leaving Viewi at 0x00 awi arrivins Lineston via Vontezo Bay
at 10:15 AM. This flizht contiwes t om to “an-juan. Fuerte ico. and latin
passengers are commonplace. ‘In passius through inmizration atd eustons. it * .
* is necessary to give the imsigratiou inspector tke nane of a specific botel
or address at which you can be reached in Jamsice.

Obtained rental ear frow itertz Car Rental and departed Vingston
Airport at 10:45 AM via Highway A-t for fort Antonio of ihe inrth coast. Aish-
way 1-1 follows the coast around te easter tip of the island. Tkere is auo ther
route to Fort Antonio. over ube vouniains. fut it is not recomended. As shown
on the standard highway nap of the island. there is a small cove atoui seven 5
miles east of Port Antonio desiguaced as “blue Hole”. The cove is rovzhly
260 feet wide by 509 feet long, and completely protected From the open sea
and weather. The cove is extremely deep. and is reported to save & szinimun :
depth of six feet at the entrance. lidal range appears to be very snall, per- :
ape one to tro feet. : ‘

wren
dp eertnes 4 nerretrene bemeweed eames «een he

When I arrived at Blue lole. which is about 2-1/2 hours br H
road fron Kingston, Robin Voore was cot available; I went into Port Autonio i
end secured a room at tke Bonnie Vue Hotel. T returned to blue Bole 2tout
_ five o'clock and there vet Robin Moore. Wr. Moore owns most of the laod
surrounding Blue Hole. with the Janaican goverment ownirg the balance. On
the beach facing the sea, Moore has luilt acd operates a bar-restaurant which:
he calls the Teahouse of the blue Lazoon. Yais accounts for the couiusion
between Blue Eole and Blue Lazoon. Gu the side of tke sountain descezding to”
the water. Moore has tuilt and lives ia a scall studio aparmenit. He also :
owns enother szal] house overlooking Slee Hole. Thais -ouse ¥as oceupied terp-
‘erarily hy a’girl who was introduced io me as bis fiancee. tlargot Palzer. and ~
- ber mother, Rita Palner. They are supposed two retcrn to their bore in Vancouver,
B.C.,- about the end of June.

oe About five o'clock I introduced myself to Moore as a friend of : i
Antonio de la Carrera, and gave, biz the este sith the recognition syntol. We :

talked from five o'clock until about 7:30 at which tine we bad dinner aid i
parted until the next worming at 11:50.

i I spent the night at the Boonie Vue Hotel and noted in passing ©
: . that aU. S. destroyer escort bated at Guantanamo Bay was acchored in the |
_ harbor for the weekend, with the sailors bein: given Liberty in Port .utonio:
: Yhis seens to be acocmon occurrence. aud could perbaps be a source of informa-
tion about Cuban patrol practices along the south coast. | }-
: ; 1
. Saturday worniug, 20 Juné. wet Moore atain. and contircued our!
discussion of the previous day. Durirg our comerzation. he introduced ne to
Fred Barrett. a native Jasaican (colured). sto is in ckarge of the operation
of the bar-restaurant. JI left \r. Yoore and Blue Hole about 2:00 o'clock and
drove io kingston, catching the 6:30 fan American flight tack to Miani, via}
a Montego Bay- . . : q
aa Following ry two serious courersations with Yoore. plus ty {
abservatious of the wau hiuself. plus wy recocnsissarce of the site iiself.;
I sutzit the followiug iteus of infomation as bein: of significance: . j .

cane ee net ene eS

ie ene re nv TE TS RN TST

RQETURNTO CHA:

inher . . meen na tpt ee a ae a tet a
ee aber Sect Thad aren terme

or



--- Page 2 ---
14-0000

~ : -

: 8. Yoore bas. just returned frow Viet Nam where be parlici-
pated in the combat operations of the American Special Forces iu Viet Naa. after
he bad gone throush about eight months of, training al the special Forces xchook
at Fort Canpbell, Kentucky. sone understandim: ef Moore's personality
ontained frou reading au interview between bin and the mazazine U. =
World Report. which was published recently. and copy of which was lef‘ with
Varia, Further understandings aod irpressionz of Noore may te obtained from -
reading his previously published twok about Jack Youngblood. an American who
participated in the events leading to Castro's overthrow of Hattista.

b. In my opinion. Moore has a buraing desire to be known |
as a tough, two-fisted, rip roariny soldier of fortune. He has participated
in real war in Viet Nai, and has received what is probably the best traiuing
in the world for guerilla fighters. namely. the C. S. Special Forces. Tais
includes training as a parachutist. ie is inclired to bray. and is probably .-
inclined to interperate use of alcobul and wucen. and his judzeuwent of in-

- portant matters is probably immature. However. he definitely understands

and is experienced iu wuerilla fizhtiug. is experienced in military operations,
and rust surely understand military security.

ce. He is definitely willing to help, but cannot contribute
cash directly; is willing to furnish the use of the cuest house on his property
for linited periods of time. Is willing to participate and aid in an operation
to land people on the sczth. coast of Cuba, tut is not willing to comit the ue
of his Property acd facilities as a stagiug area for resupply in the future.

. d. Is willing to coue to Miasi, for conferences if bis
expenses are paid. - .

2. Site Evaluation

a. Blue Hole is an , excel lent bartor; protected avainst
all weather. and with six feet of waier at ine bar. Is surrounded by very
steep slopes, heavily wooded. Dock facilities are presently very meager,
but could be quickly and easily improved. \o fuel for a boat is avaiiabie .
at Blue Hole, and at Fort Antonio (ihe closest source). the fuel available ,
is diese} fuel or automotive gasoline; no marine white gasoline is available
auywhere ia the area. This is a nost significant factor in selecting a
suitable boat. —

b. The nearest source of food aud other supplies is Port
Autonio; Fred Barrett. manager of the Blue Lazoon Club. orders and hauls
supplies from Port Antovio constantly, aud could deliver whatever supplies
were desired. Firearms and explosives are not obtainable on the island.
They would have to be smuggled in illegally.

ce. A small station wagon is available for transportation,’
provided expenses are paid by users. :

3. Miscellaueous, Inforwatiou °

a. “A local can. George Munroe. is reported to be a very .
experienced small buat captain und one who has Urought boats down frum Miant

an a ned!



--- Page 3 ---
14-0000

: . : buildinrs at Blue Hole would serve as an excellent tase of operatiou:. but that

peters

ou five different occasions. He is reported to be available to rere O58
captain on a fishing boat. aud to train a crew.

b. The S.S. Frangeline sails every two weeks fros “isa H
direct to Port Antonio, and could be employed for the delivery of supplies and
even a toat to Hobin Moore.

c. Fred Barreti, manager of the bar-restaur‘nt. seera to i
be a very capable wan. and for an additional 310 per week added to Siz regular

pay. would be quite willing to assist any operation, j

d. A‘Mr. Anihony Gason. a retired Britis aroy colonel, !
is the Jamaica representative 1 TROJAN boats, at a place called Turtle Cove, :
between Port Antonio aud Blue dole. :

e. The immigration chief for Jaczica is a man ty the name:
of George Eubcuks. who is the forner chief of police at Port Antonio: Moore +
claims that they are very close personal friends.

d. Moore is acquainted with a ran ty the name of Mike Hedges,
who is a nephew of Burke Hedges. the -\cerican who becars Cuba's actassador to
Chile scne years ago. ‘Mike lives in Kingsiony and, if he is not a Sattista
sympathizer. might prove to be a very valuable connection. The fazily is re-:
ported to be quite wealthy, and would establish an excellent cover. :

4. Operational Considerations . ;

: a. In order to avoid the use of simnificent names. I
Yustracted Moore to refer to Vanolo as George hinz. and the operatios of
landing him in Cuba would be referred to as Operatiouhiug, The cest likely
acheme seems to be ito establish a suitable boat al Biue Hole, sith ihe cover |
story to be that it belongs to \serican frieuds of Robin Moore. Hous~z is |
available locally for a limited camber of Cutans, with Moore being able to
accommodate up to six on his on property. The local boat captain. Leorge
Munroe. could be employed as captain initially. to. train the Cuban crew in
the local warine conditions, as well as serving a5 au effectite sever. In >
ny opinion. it will rot be too difficult for persons to enter Jamaica without
difficulty, provided they know a certain ninizum amount of English. 3

we

I think a suitable locatiyn could te found for redio .!
transnission and reception facilities on the nills surrounding Blue ‘ols. but —
this would have to be examined by someone skilled in radio techniques. Yateo
would be excellent. . . j

In suzmary, I would say that Robin Moore aud his property ana!

the boat necessary for the operation wuld have to be acquired and equipped

in the states and shipped down there, except for the renote pussibility that;
a suitable boat could be found in kimaton. I think a headquarters could be;
established at small cost through "wore's good offices, and IT think that Rud:
would te a good choice to coordinate the initial operations there, 3

[mentee]

i
i
ii.
fr
t
i

b

7

H .
b

2
\

. Ny
a


