
--- Page 1 ---
14,006

won
104-10103-10079| | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |

oe He

i soe s 1

SECRET - SENSITIVE
Draft Memorandum to the DCI from William Harvey

Dated 27 November 1962

This is not a controlled item



--- Page 2 ---
14-0000

[a= SECRET - a

27 Novenber 1962

i a . : . So, Note: Discussed 27 Ycverher
: Ot . . . . 1962 by DD/F with PCr
end approved generel!:
in principle by PCr,
Pully concurred to

q . ; by BD/F.
; MaKKORANDUM FOR: Director of Central Intelligence .
THROUGH: “Deputy Director (Plens)
BUBJECT: Operet ional Plen for Cont Lau tng

Operst tons 4geinst Cube

eee

ke ‘Action: This meworandua ig for. your information
- and pursuant to your request. - ‘Recommendations for action ere
conteined ia Paragraph V below. The purpose of this memernorus

is to éelinente an operational plea for the action which we,

| believe should be taken by CIA against Cubs for the predictabls

j
4

future. In ‘summary the plan provides for ccatinuing, even
- intensifying, the intelligence effort sgeinst Cuba and for
the reorientation of the current effort into » long tera

| denied ares type of operation of the ‘highest priority.

I, ASSUMPTIONS:
A, The United States Government will give public
, assurances that, provided no nuclesr or offensive weapons fre ,
an present or re-introduced into Cuba, end provided Cubs does
tee “not teke action to threaten the pence: ond security: of the -

“Western Hetaisphere, the United States coes not ingend t pean:
IOUT Is

Anvage Cuba or support ‘an  Anvasion of. Cuba. A scuncz



--- Page 3 ---
14-0000

B, These assurances will preclude any ‘meaningful CIA

: action ‘on a phased basis ‘to provoke a revolt inside Cube, since

unless ‘there are major changes in operationnl and internal con-

: ditions: in Cuba, ‘such a- revolt Af provoked would be totally

destroyed by Cuban | Sounteraction in a matter of hours ors ot

"es a practical matter’ will, preclude invading Cuba on’ the pretext
- ‘ofia contrived provocation such es an attack on Guantanamo.

: ee CIA. operations * Ainyolving a, igh noise level and a

aga aatter of. ‘policy.

De The Castro-communist regine will remain in power for

ithe indefinite future with its security and control apparatus
relatively intact and with the capability not only of crushing

unsupported resistance activity, ‘but of ‘making operational

: conditions io Cuba increasingly difficult. While it is

possible that recent and future developments including the

Soviet action in removing the offensive weppons: trom Cube mey

7 serve to weaken and discredit Castro, there is as yet no hard

indication that the: control of the Castro-comnunist regine over

. Cuba has been substantially weakened,

The, United States ‘assurances of. no invasion ‘and no

“cpr

“support ‘ofan invasion will, in effect, constitute giving to

Castro and his regime a certain degree of senctuary., This will



--- Page 4 ---
14-0000

ad

i . eo :
do. ee tog. yh. on ee,
4 o oe . aie

’

7 , severely drmage the morale and motivation of anti-regine Cubens

both Anside pad outside of Cube,” which will make: 1t ‘inerensingiy
me difficult for us to. recruit agents, ‘maintain agents already
recruited, and. continue or intensify our intelligence and other
efforts against Cube and the Castro-communist regime.
o igh . Authority: probably
a a, her a tIA :for a maximum effort.
| pa. against. cuba ‘and ay even 4 conttiae to contend that the ultinate-
4

objective ie the overthrow of the: Castro-communist regime.
“This. 46 an unrealistic objective, however, except.on a very
; Yong-tera, bests. a the: ‘United: States Governnent, we ‘believe,
wilh be unwilling. tn the. inuediote future. to commit: troops

to ‘Support gach, an overthrow. The. United States Government

in Ats overt, dealings with the Cuban, exiles probably will not —

ie above, factors to then, an the context or with the

" pluntness stated here.

°@.. In view of these factors, the so-called “Igazck Tro",

. course of action, 1.e., unlimited support of Cuban exiles

and_exile groups with no real control or objective purposes
' in ‘the hope that these groups will be able to shake the

Castro regine will, although unrealistic, become ineressing ty
Sttractive at various levels in the United States Government.

A. As & “matter of policy, political pressures and —

i 7 "economic pressures, short. of blockade raids, and “aggressive

sabotage against Cuba will ‘be. continued.



--- Page 5 ---
T. In view of the above _assuapt ions prramilitary, conima nde
and sabotage .o ‘operations, except in ‘rare selective instences
wilhl serve Little purpose; also they WALL be counter-procuct ive
since, it “underteken, they will make the collection of intel)i-
, gence more difficult and should only be undertrken in those very
’ few instances. where sn unusually “high return cen be demonstrated,
Regardless of what other pressures are placed on CIA for -
action against Cube, it would rppesr clear that Higher Authority
wild insist on 2 continued, even intensified, intelligence

‘coverage of Cuba.

ory view of ‘the policy fectora, an iocreased use of
factiities, Feal estate and basing outside the United Btates,
7 particularly in! Latin Anerica, will be both necessary snd
desirable:

Ke Adequate aerial reconnaissance of Cuba will continue.

“HI, opsectivgs: .
Based on the above sesumptions, the following objectives
‘appear to be proper for continuing CIA operations against
Cuba:
oA Take all feasible clandestine action to isolate
and assist in isolating the Castro-communist regime in Cubs
from, the rest of the Western Hemisphere and the rest of the
‘ Free World. .
“B To. ‘the maximum extent. t possible, ‘discrevit the Castro- .
communist reg ine tn Cuba and in the Western Hemisphere . and the
rest of the world.

-4-:


--- Page 6 ---
_~

. c. Meintein through clandestine means, ‘short of commando —
and guerrilla type. operations, ‘the ‘maximum economic and °
politicel pressures’ on the Cuban regine and economy not only
: for the purpose of hampering: the: Cuban regine, but for the
additional: purpose of Ansuring the ‘maximun’ ‘possible drain on

* Blee: regources, used to, Support. Cuba

an De Maintain. ‘maxis ‘possible intelligence and counter-
“ApteLLigence coverage of ‘Cube, ‘including particular ‘emphasis —

= 3. Boviet and Bloc activities in Cuba.
—_ 4.5 State of potential. resistance, including the

And temper of ‘the ‘populace.
Militia and military order of battle and equip-

“6. The loci of power and of possible stresses
‘and strains in the power centers in the ‘Cuban goverument.
_% Relationships. between Cubs, USSR, Red Chine, .
the Bloc, Latin American nations and other Free Wor ld
‘end uncommitted nations.

8.. The level of and. the weaknesses in the Cuben

economy:

-b- a,



--- Page 7 ---
14-0000

&. Teke max Lomm action to induce a aplit in the Cuban

: regine ond maintain the. capability of capitalizing. domediately

through clandestine means to the extent possible on sny

: aignificent uprising, revolt, resistance, | split in the. regina,

or strains ‘end stresses among Cuban leadership or in: Cubnn/

Bloc. relationships. :
me OPERATIC PLAN:

- -Bapionage and Intelitgence Collection - All fereible

‘effort should be undertoken to continue snd intensity intelli-

gence: collection concerning Cuba. The status of, our intelli-

gence” eollection, and elated operational activity, at the

: present ‘time and its development ‘during the past gix months
is delinested .in detail in Attachment A, which was preprred te
_ serve as the basis ‘for. the i¢'s report on this particular

‘matter ‘to the President's Board of Consultants on Foreign

Intelligence. “You will note that this lengthy docusent ‘
breaks down under numerous sub-beadings the intelligence .
coverage which has been developed. by the Clandestine Service.
Set out below sro specifics of operational action it is
proposed to take to continue ond, as possible, incresse {n-
telligence coverage of Cubs. .
1. intelligence Exploitation < of Refugees: As you
know, with the quarantine and the cessation of sir

7 travel the heavy’ flow of Cuban refugees has dwindled

“almost. to nothing. In view of this and in connection

‘


--- Page 8 ---
14-0000

“with the contingency plenning for supporting any poreible
mjlitary action in Cuba, the Opa-Locks: Interrogation “
. Center as such was dismantled, ‘although. the personne)
of the ‘Center have been retained intact. In order to
7 re-establish the flew of intelligence from refugees,
at as proposed . that, Pan Auerioan Airweye and KLM be
a " tnduced’ to to. reiastitute their regular: flights from
a Havana to Miami, This should be done ss soon ag .
S possible after the settlement of. the current negotintions

and UN digeussions. Coincident with this, _the Opa~Locka
_-retugee Anterrogation center will be re-esteblished
"with the game personnel,
. : 2. Resident Agents in Cuba: _Every effort. will be
made, to continue to exploit to the fullest, preserve the
7 viability of. and, where necessary, re-satablish communica
foe at tions: with the 131, recruited ‘agents now resident in Cuba,
oe om” "Fo en extent, the speed and: effectiveness of ‘this effort
. "will of course depend upon the stringency of future
. Cuban security end control sction, which it is impossible
. a8 yet to accurately forecast.
-8. Third Country Operations: The priority on re-
cruiting agents in third countries for dispatch to Cuba
> will he reiterated snd etrengthened and every effort
will be made. to increase this coverage, both. through

‘the. Asvelopment of additional resident agents in Cubs



--- Page 9 ---
14-0000

d 2 a
4. .Wdieiseny Operations: We will continue to press

G “9
| 4 and threugh the development of additional legal travellers.
; ;
the Unison services who are rssisting us in the effort
against Cuba for additional coverage, including the
recruiting of egents within their own rrens for joint
{ dispetch to Cuba. The services>most effectively co-
operating at this poinat in this connection are the

Qritish, “Dutch, French, Spaiieh, Itelian, Greek,

Norwegian, Danish; Nest Germuy, Mexican, Argentinien,
‘Uruguayan, Canadian, Chilean, and fereeliy Direct
approaches to several of these Services) either by you
personally or in your name, ps you prefer, sre
being separately recommended. Personal ropresentation
| by you to the S@rvices> underlined ebove would be useful.
In addition, we will re-survey 11 other diaison sérvices ~~
. with which we are in contact and reiterste to those
appearing ‘to have any assets usable against Cuba our
extreme interest in maximum coverage of this problem.
| In connection with the Uimisonyproblem generally, we wilt
| endervor to induce ell of the TWaison services to mate
greater use of their hational assets, both inside and
| outside cf Cubr. Perticular attention will be given to
| possible utilizetion of the Yatican, 7
_ no Se Maritime Operations: In addition to increasing
t effort to get at serman agents end other naritime
sssets through (iaison services, we will continue our
unileteral third country efforts to recruit seamen and

<i


--- Page 10 ---
a ; 4
. rrerticularly Cuban seamen, to increane the twenty
officers and crew members shoard six Cuban vessels we sre
now running es controlled agents.
6. Penetration of Cuban Installations Abrosd: At
the present time we are running 12 Cubrn diplomats
stationed outside Cube rs controlled agents end have vinhle
‘operations aimed st an additional 20 Cuban diplomats.
We propose to continue pnd intensify the current progren
of attempting to recruit or defect every Cuben officin!}
representstive ebroad to whom we can géein access rnd
concerning whom we have eny reason to believe sa
susceptibility to approach exists. These additionel

operattons end where eppropriate in cenjunction with
diadeon, services.
4]... Audio Penetrations of Cuban Installations
Abroad: At the present time we have sudio and/or
telephone tap coverage of Cuban officirl installations
in Chile, Tealy, Mexico, The Netheriands,, England, |
Uruguay, Greece, Spaliy Franc’, and Cenecay) Ko

mejor expansion of this coverage is presently
contemplated, but we will continue to survey edditicn:t
targets of opportunity and wherever pessible instelt

coverage in those cases where the additional intelli-

| ie

i

;

|

| penetrations will be attempted both through Untlatere

‘gence from this type of source over and above what we
. f .

ere now receiving would sppeer to make such instalirtion

worthwhile,



--- Page 11 ---
14-0000

a" co
vs

, Gommuntertions Intelligence: Ve will continues
our present CIA Close Support coverage from the KOLA
station in WinmD at the same Level end will continue
to press HSA for cdditionsl coverage of Cuban comaunticr-
tions. As the current situstion “neormelizes" it should

be possible for NSA to reinstitute and perhaps even

‘increase their seaborne intercept coverage of. Cuban

communicetions.

r

9. Communist Party Operations: A complete survey
has been made world-wide of all Communist Party

penetration operations and wherever any such penetration

can be directed ogainst Cuba either by dispatching the

sgent to Cuba or by pointing the agent agsinst Cubsrn
targets, this will be done, except in those cases wheres
such action would result in unneceptablgprejudice te
the operations in the srex where the ngent is now based.
It is believed that the most lucrative field for the
redirection of such operations to the Cuban target will
be Latin America where there sre 65 penetrations of
various communist parties. Of this 65, the survey

we have conducted indicates that 23 have some direct

pertinent access to Cuban targets. Ail of these 22 wil!

be directed against these targets unless in uny case

OF gxamined to see if they can be diverted to Cuban trrgets.

~10~


--- Page 12 ---
14-0000

pat

10 “lege lly infiltrated Agents: The two :

sdccesatui black infiltrated teans (COBRA and AMTORUID)

Which heve produced substential intelligence will be

continued, resupplied, end reinforced but pointed

“primar lly at continued intelligence collection and rt

the recruituent for intelligence collection purposes of

| other, Cubans, who already are legally resident in Cuba

in the areas where the terns are operating (Pinger del

‘Rio and Oriente). In addition, on the most carefully.

selected basis, where it appears feasible, ‘additional

_.- agents. and teans. will be: infiltrated black into Cuba
‘1n an effort te. duplicate the performance of the COBRA

and AMTORRID teams end perticularly to. recruit ‘and, eB

possible, train additional agents legally resident in

. Cubs...

“Ah. Exfiltration: As feasible, egents | and potentir1

' recruits now in Cuba will be exfiltrated for

_- training, indoctrination, supplying with conmunications,

- and motivation, They will then be re-infiltrated inte

Cube, primarily on intelligence missions. Where porsible,

this will be done through legal trave) channels, but
where this is not possible, it will be done wherever

. feasible through our black inf{ltration-extiltration

y Aietiities, prinsiity our: maritine assets,

-ll- :



--- Page 13 ---
14-0000

BB Much of the: above effort, aa noted wiil be prinarily
. directed towards developing all possible evidences ‘of stress -
or strain within the regine and between . the regine and other
7 uations, particularly the Bloc, An intensive program will
be. continued to. teke advantage of any possible opportunity
a to weaken, | subvert. oF.
a fashion. This 1s basteally: 2 ong ‘term effort. A great deni

_ of work. elready has. gone into tis and the current

status of this. progran and the proposed. further expldtation
of: the numerous’ leads: wo ‘have developed is being. made, in
/ the. duterests of brevity in this menorandum, the subject of
p separate ‘compilation. The effectiveness of sasets aimed st
actually splitting ‘the regine, i.@., & ‘palrce revolt, will of
; course. depend, to an. extent, on the willingness of the United
7  Bte s Government to support then | and it is entirely possible
"that ax ony: ‘guch effort might fail unless supported with militery
7 : forces which on “the basis of the. assumptions in Paragraph I
7 above would appear unlikely.
botage: On the basis of the sesumptions set out.
above, comsndo type sabotage, ainor sabotage, and other
acts of sabotage inside ‘Cuba would appear to serve littie
purpose end should. not. be undertaken except in the rare
instances where an opportunity is presented with ecceptabie

risk. to: do major ‘damage to the . Cuban @conony, At. is proposed

' to continue: searching for such limited opportunities, ‘put |

wee | 0. active or wide: scale program ig contemplated.



--- Page 14 ---
14-0000

Dy Paramilitary, Commando, and Guerrilie Type Operations:

Given the Assumptions ‘fa Paragraph I above, no wide scale
program ef such activity should be undertaken, However, we

propose ‘to maintain in being our present fecilities and

the enpebiiity of undertaking such operations in order to
. fally exploit any ‘substantial change in internal Cuban con-
: ditions or ‘eny substantial revolt or uprising which night occur.
, EL Econoalec Warfore: . It 1s proposed to ‘continue end
- intensify the program #lready undertaken to deny through | .
“clandestine &ud covert means critics] materials to the Cuben

a cs

- 7 _ Sconiomy. | ‘This consists primarily of deniel operations, possibly

firns and governnents to prevent the Shipmenta of atrategic
materials, to Cuba.

. : : "some Preolusive buying and inducing friendly U.S. and allied

| -F Sounterintelligence: The current couaterintelligence
m and counterespionage progran against the Cuban G-2 and —
_ related services wiil be continued end as possible intensified,
“This program has developed substentialty and it should be
possible within the coming months to increase its effectiveness
; considerably in countering not only Cuban but Bloc tate1li-
: gence. operations mounted against United States interests
from Cuba. — , oe
G. ‘Political Action, Propaganda, Paychologics1 Warfare:
tes Ta this tiekr the following tasks will be cont inued and where
appropriate intensified: oe
. oo. Assist and support State in any feasible acticn.



--- Page 15 ---
14-0000

to develop end exploit current OAs and Latin Anerictn .
attitudes favorable” to the containment end/or overthrow
of the Crstre~comuunist regine. °

2, A 4ssist State in ‘the development of post-Cratro

"concepts, ‘leaders, end political groups.

3, Stimlate, support. and guide covertly the

" Propaganda and political action activities of the Cnc

end other Cuban political Groupa tad individuals, +s
eppropriate, who offer a potential for impact ingide
Cuba, |

- he Develop, maintain and exploit the will of the

- Cuban people to resist Castro~commnian, making maxinun

use of the downgrading ot Castro and his regime during |
the missile crisis.

Ss. Discredit and ridicule Castro and his regime

in Cuba, in the Heuisphere snd @lsewhere, with emphosis

on the thene the missile crisis demonstrsted con-

clusively that Castro is nothing but a mere pawn of

‘Soviet imperialisn,

. 6. Continue "Radio Anericas" ond other. CIA-
Sponsored Cuban exile radio brosdcasts +s appropriate.
v Launch propaganda balloons after an operationn!
capability has been established and policy authority is

' Granted to conduct propaganda: balloon operations,

8., Contime the infiltration of propagands materinl

into Cuba via open mails, legal travellers and couriers,

with Special emphasis on selective black operations,

~14-.


--- Page 16 ---
14-0000

H, Exploitation of Exile Groups: We will cont inue

the clrhdestine exploitation of exile groups for intelligence

collect tm, psychologien) warfare and other 2pproved missions,

/As feealhle, we will act to mount ss much ef this effort es

possible from areas outside the continental United States, end
particularly fron Latin America. If Higher Authority decides

“on | a “Track Two" concept. or on. any, ‘pimilar concept which

“contemplates heavy uncontrolled and only generally directad

section operations of Cuban groups against Cubs, it is believed

that: efforts should be mado to: transfer as much as possible
i) of the: responsibility, for this non-Clandestine, non-intel ligence

“type. operation into the political field, which is the province

. of the Department of State. _In this connection, it is believed

iit would be rdvisable to press for the creation within the
Departuent of State of an office of Cuban Exile Affairs tc

|
| nenae the overt government relationships with Cuban exile

| Groups.
IV. ORGANIZATIONAL AND PROCEDURAL CHANGES:
Maximun duplementation of the above plan which provides
for the most intensive feasible collection of intelligence,
the implementationof releted programs as outlined, and the
muintenance of capabilities to exploit targets of opportunity

89 well as take advantage of any future substantial changes

"in internal Cuban conditions will, 1t is believed, permit

and wake ndvisrble the following:

-15-



--- Page 17 ---
- od

A, & grecual but substantial reduction in the expenditures
and pergonnel of Task Force W. : ee
B, Consideration of the re-positioning of Task Force W

within the Clandestine Service, possibly ss s major coaponent

of. the WH Diviaion under different direction.

c The abolition of the operations] Mongoose mechanisn,
D., The removal of the past frauework which required

detailed considerntion by the Special Group (Augmented) of

even minor operations] deteils and decision by committee on

, points which 4t. is believed are completely withia the purview

of the DEI and ‘those officers to whom he delegates decision.

Ve ‘RECOMMENDED ACTION:

A. Your concurrence in the above general operational plen

is recommended.

B. -It is recommended that you discuss this plan with

the Special-Group (Augmented) and secure its concurrence.

c. It is recomended that you secure from the Special
Group (Augmented) policy approval to attempt to induce lan
American Airways and KL to resume their flights between Hiantl
end Hsvena ot the appropriate time. ,

vp. It is recommended that if any "Track Two" concert
is proposed, you endesvor to transfer to the Department of
State all pessible ‘overt aspects of this type of uncontrolled

~16—


--- Page 18 ---
mee end support. of Gu exile groups.

at is Feccnmended that. the ‘Mongoose operations1
nechanien, be abolished. .
¥. 12 you concur in this concept, specific Fecomnendat tons

will be nade to you. concerning. the re-post tioning of Teak Force |
aaa within ‘the Do/P. -

WILLIAM K. HARVEY
Gaiet, Task Force ¥

-17—


--- Page 19 ---
14-0000

 pratevdriy
; (43 Mav, 1962

4

as
vedic: the sastro/ Comountat ‘regine im Cub 2

a
e

and political preagare
sata retard dovatop-

A ‘SOURCE RGFERENCE -
IN. CS ‘HISTORECAL - -

. “PAPER HO. @

: ‘ OX—

£ nits pocuusnt 18
so


--- Page 20 ---
14-0000

rs

SHINE
-2-

vo on Cuban-Bloe relationshiss.

wugstoH we — — - —

: covertly. ‘support the abeve-cited vw, 8. national

ee gs sovier/Caban and: aa relationshies,
a ee - Bh, Beonenic.
, Rolittests
J Assist, and support: State in any feasible action to
“develop active 0 OAs. and. atio-sverican country support
fer the oan



--- Page 21 ---
14-0000

iS

SEMI

shy

ani supplies fron reaching

| Develop and exploit tenntons bet



--- Page 22 ---
14-0000

ne ¢ byae? im uvere, Lieotts g! ya
amy of f third comutty

: rroteererscbttena of legal travalern
who have ‘potential “govese to tn etgabfteant ts Ase fareren 2 Aion
: \ ~ ' “ § % ay pir =“ '

i Repanston of sommantations Jnralidgends poertontes-

dy tm tha.G-2,. ps Adee, and nélitta nets. (vhir

“4 5 PROMPT
bi fr 1 automatic

“TRC Ne ang
erating


--- Page 23 ---
14-0000

ae ah Maintain, refcgen debrtafieg reese.

Monti ce mh Mets oov® 54 VIC

_seplanencatin ‘of eRe

“Tha: follwing progran' te sonsinexed. fnsent!-t1
ae Maintain the sepabt lity to tafiltrate/enFiiteats

“suome | feo Biel



--- Page 24 ---
14-0000

gr
CRS
¥

“Walntatn suf etotent covert. Pry eta ‘to meek raquo

_ ments levied on eG, epproved U, 8. Hitters
contingency, Planes? ere fi Anternal asrete are

5 a

sa

ag

MB SECRET
SENSITIVE

ARGUP 1 |
ata Ae, ft tr oT Ritgmadte

tae

PS


