
--- Page 1 ---
10216-10075)

2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
: FFUR-554S . i4

RE: "43-3" — (CHECK “X" ONE)
|__| _ MARKED FOR INDEXING
[ = | No pibexinG requieeD

INDEXING CAN BE JUDGED
BY QUAUFIED HQ. DESK ONLY

FPIB-£L70, 13 May 1958, Transmittal of MERAVALIN Tap TranseSfots~ >
s P Zz

1. The information obtained in the nane check of DAVIDSON reveals that
Subject is an aggressive intemational businessman who Would possibly
participate in any business proposition for a connisaion; however, when .
negotiating with representatives of other countries, Subject usually protects
himself by reporting the business propos tion to a U.S. Government agency
or official, ‘he name check reveals that the relationship betzcen
Drew Pearson and HIRAVELIN may have resulted from Subject 's personal contast
with both men. The information re MIRA/ELIN may have reached Pearson
through Subjectts office associates.

2. The following are the details of the check on Subjects

coc eeegpnergumine’s + pevateel wy mupaygeage = peng epee memetpt ienesing ones Coxemgigeg:

z

a. Subject, a U.S. citizen, born 19 Jampary 1921, is married and
maintains his residence and office in Washington, D.C. As reported by
XUJTP, B Noverber 1955, Subject eh:red his office suite in the Byatt
Building with James Farriss, a former ODACID ex,7 y and Jack
Northam Anderson and Frederick G. Blumenthal, Vashington representatives
of PARAIR magazine. Frederick G. Blumenthal is a former ires Pearjon
leg-can wile Anderson continues to work for Pearson,

b. An ODSHVY report dated 6 Movember 1957, stated that Subject
filed a registration statement, Xo. 886, 18 April 1955, with the
Foreign Azents Registration Section, Department of Justice, Subject
listed as his foreign principal President A. Somosa, Republic of
Nicaragua. Tne nature and purpose of his representing the foreign
princival was given as purchasing agent for various bureaus of the
Republic of Nicaragua, including the military forces. He also stated
that he dealt in goneral public relations and was self-employed,
Another ODENVY report of 18 Jus 1957 stated that Subject listed hia
Occupation as a Public Relations Comsel and Business Consultant in
& report to & local credit bureau, The report indicated that Subject’
Previously spent some tims in Cuba, Mexico, Nicaragua, and the

Republic and is well acquainted with various business and
government officials in the above-mentioned, locations.

Ce On several occasions in the past Subject volunteered information
to various goverment agencies and offered his assistance to the
U.S, Government. In an ODENVY report dated 15 September 1950, Subject
advised that through a friend, Max Henriquez, who Subject claimed to be
@ representative for the Joninican Republic te the United Natios,
Subject had becoma acquainted with Vincente Toledano, and was
sufficietly close to him to obtain important information c:
activities of the Commnist Party in Mexico. Subject offered his
assistance to the U.S. Government in this matter, According to a
KUJUP report, submitted by the Office of International Trade, dated
1953, Subject furnished information regarding travel in 1950 between
Mexice and the USSR and information on trans-shipments through Mexico. .

GA PEMOUS EDMON.
BRACES FORMS:

‘S3.2K 51-224 AND 51-29
WORION ARE OBSOLETE.



--- Page 2 ---
14-0000

A Wemoranchm of 8 Hovenber 1955, reported that Subject had approached -
a KDAE representative on 30 September. 1955, at waich time ha requested
guidmce and possible financial assigtance for a proposed business :
arrangesont with Peter HIRALULMEC, former Yugoelav Assistant Military
Attache in Washington, and now Chief of the Foreign iivision of PUTNIK,

a travel and tourist agency, The proposed business partnership was

for the purpose of opening a PUTHIK travel agency in Now York City.
Subject bad not tucn iwweesuns in participasing in the travel ami
‘tourist agency in New York City but had suggested to the Tugoslavs

that he would act as their public relations expert and publicise
Yugoslaviats tourist attractime throughout the 0.5. Subject stated he had
initially contacted KUBARK for the purpose of obtaining financial backing
in exchange for any information that he might be able to obtain through
his contacts with the Yugoslavs. Subject was informed by KURARK

} representative that KUBARK would naitncr give him financial aseietance
nor influence in any way his personal decision in the matter,

d, Also the files reflect that Subject has had contacts with other
purchasing agente for foreign countries: In MANA 2217, 19 March 1957,
Subject and Isaac Cohen, Israeli purchasing agent in New York, visited
Nicaragua ostensibly to discuss the purchase of Isracli corvettes by
the lAcaraguan Governnmt. 4n JUEIVi report dated 32 March 1958, fron.
8 confidential source, stated one San Cummings, m international arms
dealer, presently has a quantity of cuns in bond in the "free trade
gone", Eew York Clty, and Subject ond James Farriss had been atthempting
to locate buyers for these guns. An ODENVY report.dated 31 March 1953, :.
Stated that Abdul Rachman SURTOKUSINO, djakarta, Inaonesia, connec ea
with the Indonesian Police Force, had been in tha U.S, in the early
' part of 1956 seeking arms for Indonesia, Due to U.S. regulations, he

. Wie unable to obtain arms. At this time Subject interested SURTORUSIAD
in purchasing aras from the Dominican Republic, According to source,
Subject and SURIOXUSUMO made a trip to the Dominican Republic in Juns
1956 accom-anied by a U.S. arms expert and Xarique Garcia, Jn, who
had claimed to be a personal friend of Gen, Rafael L. Trujillo of
the Dominican Republic and who is registered with the Foreign Agents
Registration Section, listing his foreign principal as the Dominican
Republic. It was reported in HMA 0923, 6 Angust 1956, that Subject
had written a letter to the U.S. Ambassador to Nicaragua in which
he stated the purpose of his recent trip and informed the Ambassador
that "other reds" were attempting to undercut the arms price as quoted
by the cominican Repub’ «4a réported in ODACID on 6 May 1958, ~
Subject, as representative of the Government of Nicaragua, last year
purchased 73 Staghound armored cars from Israel for the GON and also
negotiated the subsequent sale of 30 of these vehicles to Cuba.
Recently Subject approached U.S. officials in Mcaragua re disposal
of 20 of these vehicles to the Guatamalan Government,

e. The only reference to MIRAVELIN reflected in this name check
was a KUJUMP report dated 22 April 1957 which stated that a letter,
found by a law enforcemnt officer in February 1957 among MIRAY:LIN's
personal effects, seemed to imply that a joint effort was being made
by MIRAVELIN and the late Nicaraguan president SOW2A to open a casino
in Nicaragua, This letter dated 27 August 1956 was written on the
letterhead of the Nicaraguan Government Agency, Suite 122), Wyatt
Building, ‘ashin D.C., I. Irving Davidson, U.S. representative
and atateds nineloesd are’ ix-Ia bank particulars you moked for.
Sam Waugh will cooperate with us 100%. Be sure that Pres. Somosa and
only Pres. Somosa designates you 50% partner in the casino. You don't
ner ‘any partner for the hotel end of the weal at all. You don't
want one either, I am sure Pres, Somoza won't care about this, Don't

hesitate to ask Somosa suring about ory ns I already talked with -
him and told him that pe you w over this project

RMS,
SN28 1-204 AND 51.7
‘Wect APE OBSOLETE.



--- Page 3 ---
14-0000 +

: " CONTINUATICN OF
OISPATCH

I will then imow that Hicaragua will
ility dn the hemisphere.
you

Ha has also
Your boy, Irv Davidson.®

3+ This information has not been cleared for passage to our lalson

(oR dite

services,

LEE

USE PREVIOUS EOTION,
51-28, $1204 AND 51-29
WHICH ARE OBSOLETE


