
--- Page 1 ---
14,0000

104-10173-10132| | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |.

: / - . 20 December 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

SUBJECT: E. Howard Hunt

urns, Spé ial Aasistani. to the DD
sada that. ‘could ‘be iolléwed by. whoeve has. -

: 964, wheit he: was s alleged to have been engaged i in surveillance.
activities of Barry Goldwater.

. “2. 1 said ‘that our. files ‘showed Hunt was in DO Division (Burns = é
was not familiar with that title, but recognized it as-the predecessor . vo
of FR Division) and in August 1964 was assigned to the Washington

field office. I suggésted that Stan Gaines, who was Deputy Division ~ ;
ief of DO Division and now DCOS Bonn, might be in a position to , :

give 4 few groups on what Hunt was ‘supposed to be doing then. I . .
suggested that he be ‘queried by éable. Burns said Gaines is staying : aaae
on under contract for a while, so would continue to be. available. : b .
: 3. 7 said that Fig Coleman was on the Iberian desk when the
‘Harit assignment to Madrid was brought up in 1964 and:when Hunt nes
to the field in 1965. He could give the background on the assign- . ¢ i

! which seems to have been through Karaméssines at Helms"
direction. ollection would give leads. [told him that. Coleman.
* becarne.COS’ ‘Madtid. later, after ‘Hunt left Spain, and could provide:
_ information on what Hunt did not do for the Agency’ during that period.
ie suggested that both Helms: and Kararnessines should be'queried. |
aveas a possible press’ treatment that Hunt wa nigaged in -~> ~
- dom erations (something Senator Baker is pursuing). and that.
“his assignment:to Spain: ‘after: the election: could be presented as. ‘giving

chim ¢ me t to cool off. T thought we had ‘to Pursue: ‘the matter to be. —
sure wer “know the facts.” . Ce ae : : : .

. : Bo

. - Pod.

4.) 1 asked Burns ‘to be sure that. we aré on information distribution a

. of: cables to the field on this, given our assigned esponsibility for :
- keeping, files.on Watergate. He Said we are on the PLMHPLANK for
messages to Helms.. He would advise the action officer. I ‘said | ‘we are. . : : v.

: . available for. any help we can give.



--- Page 2 ---
14-0000

cee SECRET

9 May 1974

MEMORANDUM FOR: OPS/RNO- . co . ; 2,
_ SUBJECT b Watergate File Research > Fina} ‘Report. ; ; mG

se

1, The files of “the immediate ice of the chief, 0P8/056
‘have been checked for material - ant to the ‘subject, of this.

_ memorandum, The: check included -c! ironological files.of communt--
‘cations of which’ 1-was. the author while assigned to Madrid, Spain
ta the period duly” 1970. to. duly 1973. Nothing pertinent was found.

. “21 have att tempted to recollect any other details which, =. ‘
: conceivably could. be partinent and which relate to the” period = Be mo,
- of my assignment. to Madrid. . The only points which 1 recall but . : po.

on. which. I “have no documentation are these: . a - 5 -

ae There were occasional: joshiag “friquities ‘nade of mé . _ a oo
~ by. ‘Amer can residents of Madrid about “the: reported presence °°.” TP
“in Spain of €.Howard Hunt, in 1972... My standard reply was; oar
that I knew only. what I had. ‘Heard rumored. . ‘For the record, - : a “pt
at no time did ‘Hunt contact.me, and1 have never known of his , Ht
having tried to contact. any Station “personnel in Spain during
. ‘the period. 1970-73. I made. ‘no “effort personal ly to ascertain
; whether or not Hunt was. in Spain, and had no effort made. by.
~ vary § Station member. wy : : an

i
i
i
H
i
i
{
fr
i

: oA Station officer, possibly Richard Quderkirk now 2
“assigned to Guatemala, was given some information by an:
‘Wnformant in” 1972 concerni “reported activities in-Spain._
i ofmation.. be given . .
@ Embassy" s Eco mic Section “chief, John © et mele bd Geek
ith ‘keeping abreast’ of, -
“Station did not-pursue |

"informally. to:
Oliver. That officer was.-charged
developments relat ; T

‘that Subject, as I a
a Sweporbable interest, ‘accord 9. to requi ‘ements of ‘the ‘period... - -

E2. wecer. a
ra. BY 058759 to



--- Page 3 ---
14-0000

Soe SeeRET.

-2-

sooo SUBJECT: Metergate Fic Research’ = Final Report (cont'd)

3. There is.no. other employee. assigned to.m) ‘inmediate
TOffice who-has relevant personal -knowledge of eVents and =~
"personalities. et _— . foe _—
det %.Queec -

Robert E. Oven :
Chief, OPS/0SG



--- Page 4 ---
14-0000

CJ unctassiFien . Ih Aat ; _ - CJ CONFIBL. TIAL (Q secret i
__ | suniect. coy
] rom - : — ae
Director of Finance: mt ‘
212 Key Building "

COMMENTS (Nember sack commint te thow from whom
13 whom. Deaw'a line’ across column ohter wath comment.)

see EV ores fe” eeenee mV emureneuvies m7 OUNTERNAL 7 wares aeeseren


--- Page 5 ---
14-0000

!

secret

a 27 FEG 1974

‘MEMORANDUM FOR: Inspector General
SUBJECT: Howard" Hunt -

et . . 5

At the recent request of ‘the Deputy Director: for
int and Services, the Office of Finance has searched |

1

./ its records to deteriiing if we could find any payment to ;
“Mr. Hunt in an amount of approximately $30,000 that required
no accounting. ve Lae . , . :

Manag

2.. -We have searched, the following records: co Cee 5
a. The expense runs for the period July 1964 to_— rs

June 1973 for the immediate, Office of the DCI,

. the immediate Office of. the DD/P, FI Staff,

“- "el Staff, CA: f- and the Office: of Securit ;
We have checked Various items that were. Te- vee ee
‘flected in these. expense records but have : : .
identified nothing rélating .to Mr. Hunt.

b. The Madrid Station; JMWAVE and FR/Washington

: Office accountings to determine if there were |
funds passed by ‘the Stations to Mr. Hunt during
‘the year he served under non-official’ cover, in ~
Madrid. We could find no payment .to Mr. Hunt
either in his true name or his two identified

premade tins tae

Mr. Hunt!s travel claims for. the period |

. travel claims: that
“normal travel
‘per diem. |
ds We ‘made a- specific’ analysis of: Mrz Hunt's.’
- advarice account for the period :he was under 0.
non-official cover (July '65-Sept 166) ‘and have”.

s E2. IMPDET |. co Lae
_-CL BY: 006567 mo



--- Page 6 ---
14-0000

y

_ SUBJECT: Howard Hunt

determined that $33,500 was advanced. to hin.
for-travel and transportation of household
goods to and from Madrid with one trip to
Paris for. he and.his family to renew their
Spanish visas. All of this advance was fully
. accounted for.._However, in his accounting,
one item appeared unusual. It was an °
expenditure of $1,600. for a-sensitive | .
opération which was approved for write-off -by Mr. ©
Joc... . Desmond’ Fitzgerald on 1 June 1966 without 7
Te, further ‘accounting. . ne

3. Also, we confirmed. that no other Agency advance accounts

were established for Mr. Hunt during this. period.

: 4. At the beginning of his non-official cover tour, it
was necessary to establish a bank account in his name. The
EUR Division accordingly, requested we’ open an account at ‘the
Chase, Manhattan’ Bank in Mr. Hunt's name. to receive all non- —
-salary payments (Mr. Hunt “had an“account at Riggs National -
Bank to receive his salary and allowance payments). The -

following: deposits were made to the account during 1965S. and~

1966: |
7 Account opened: 13 July 1965
a3 July 1965 ———C—~*«SS22, OTD”
22 July 1965 | ‘5,000. °

IS September 1965 |
6 October 1965 2
19 July 1966s 5,000.
OO - $30,000
All of the abdve have been’ accounted for by ‘submission.
of .travel and ‘transportation accountings. ~ woos
5. We feel at this time without specific- guidelines that,
further searching would be-sonewhat’fruitless.. One strange © i
aspect of the non-official cover assighment in Madrid is that i
: all the costs were charged to the support allotment of the :
2 .EUR Division which is.not normal as non-official cover people
- are usually assigned to a project. It is unusual to have a

* case officer abroad for one year on an operational assignment
without hin incurring operational expenditures,

-2-



--- Page 7 ---
14-0000

SECRET

SUBJECT: Howard unt \

_6.. The Office of Finance ‘hes -not found operational :
expenditures except for the $1,600 mentioned above. . }
as Therefore, it is suggested that Mc. .Karanessines be questioned :
oR as to a project or projects to which Mr. Hunt's operational | A
-B - expenditures if incurred would have been charged. - : A
a 7. Another possible course ofaction is to request the {
Director to ‘approve my, asking a éleared contact at Chase. ~- “4
Manhattan Banik: to. provide a, transcript-of all entries into. |
F Nr. Hunt's ‘Chasé Nanhattan Bank account. . ee ed
4 . . , ° . 3
iS -8. We are Girrently reviewing. records of all cashier's I
. oe checks prepared and issued by Monetary to determine if- any . i
a were payable to Mr. Hunt. Hopefully this effort will be. i
g finished by the end of the week. an . i-
& 1

CR B;, .Yale-

, pirdetor of “Fi nance
_ we
-3- :
Sebne lt :
1


--- Page 8 ---
14-0000

20 December 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

SUBJECT: E. Howard Hunt

A 1 ‘spoke with. Fig Coleman about Hunt's assignment to Spain,
.had spoken with him. back in August when we were inquiring into
Feported activities involving Mrs. | Hunt. 2 eee

3
A
i

- Coleman said that he got out of the War College in May 1964

(by which he fixed:the time), and took over the Iberian desk, Bill
Ryan was C/EUR (or was it WE Division at the. time). In early autumn’
“Ryan said that he had just been-informed by the DDP (Karamessines)
that Hunt was to be assigned to Madrid as DCOS, as a directed assign-

“ment. by Helms, A memo was prepared and sent to. the COS, Jim Noel
- (now retired).: There.was.nothing further for about a month when Ryan’
called Coleman in and. showed hin a RYBAT letter from Noel stating.
that Ambassador Stanley J. Woodward would not have Hunt in the

Embassy.

3. Woodward-had been the Ambassador to Uruguay when Hunt
was COS Montevideo. He had a low opinion of Hunt and was counting
the days until Hunt left.:: The President of Uruguay ‘visited President.
Eisenhower in the;States, at which time he requested a personal favor--_ -
that Hunt be ‘reassigned to Montevideo, - So Hunt took another tour. ,
Woodward was outraged, and had his revengé ‘in n 1964 when. Hunt was -

te be sent.as DCOS to Madrid.

2 emg ee nel ue

4. After a couple of month’- early 1965--Ryan célied ‘Coléman
in and, observing that ‘there was more than one way to.skin a cat,
told him that Hunt was going to Spain: under nonofficial cover... This |
didn't require anything special, Ryan saying’ that he, didn't. know , -
= much about it.” It came to,him from Karamessines.on Helms! order, ;
‘. Hunt was to have the telephone: number of the COS, but he would do.

nothing for the station. Hunt was 'to submit administrative’ vouchers’ :
_ , for, reimbursement of his expenses and they were to be paid. Coleman 7 f
“<gaid- he never saw Hunt before he went out. -He knows that there was
no operatiorial reporting, to indicate that Hunt was doing. anything. .

pa
¥
¢
=
%
e



--- Page 9 ---
14-0000

The vouchers were not large, although the documentation was. poor,

Coleman raised the question with Ryan about his signing | off, and

Ryan waid he could talk-to Karamessines- i€ he Wished, “Because “~~

Coleman.had a-close personal. association with Karamessines he:

did just’ that, He was told by Karamessines that he didn't know much:
» about it eithor--"Helms said send him out." He was instructed: to go

“ahead.

sage dae

“7. §, “In early July 1966 (4 July) Coleman went to Madrid. He
“hada ten ‘day turnover with Jim Noel. Hunt had already- one and
he did-not'sée him, Noel said he didn't know what Hunt did “but.
that Coleman. need not worry because he was gone. beget ok

. “6. Séveral months ago Noel was at a seminar at which
Ambassador Woodward was also present. At the time he asked
about Hunt, Woodward said it might still be dragged into the. press.
Tad Szule had been after Woodward-about the Hunt assignment to
Spain. Coleman observed that Szule did have a long article on Hunt
in the New York Times, and the Spain assignment was mentioned,
but without: any ‘conclusions as. to its. sigificance. le

ting. on

¢
the event, but not much. A letter out and the reply, but not much more. ¢
ie . 4

. . . }

“2. Coleman said ‘the RYBAT file of c/EuR may have some

ee en,

we : coe s. D. Breckinridge ‘



--- Page 10 ---
14-0000

- . os . ~
. : . . se

22 February -1974 :
: LG Fike 0 Fab 3K

; : po. ren

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD et : . ;

¥ - SUBJECT: E. Howard’ Hunt--Madrid Assignment a 7 7 i
: - 1. On 22 February-1974, Mr. Frederick N. Evans 3
*.-and the undersigned interviewed Mr. Edward Ryan,. : :
_Ghief, Staff D, Deputy Director for Operations, on . 3

the subject of Mr. E. Howard Hunt. During the period .-
“of Mr. Hunt's assignment as a Contract trae? A agent _
to Nadtid between July 1965 and September 1966, Mri.
Ryan had been the Deputy Chief of the Western European." ~
Division, Deputy Director for Plans. The purpose of °
the interview was to determine if Mr. Ryan had aayie |
information bearing on the matter of the operational
~--assigament of Mr. Hunt during this-petiod. °°...

2. Mr. Ryan stated that the assignment of Mr. .-
Hunt both to the Guropean Divisidn and to Madrid was -
handled without. benefit of the routine processing |”
procedures through the Western Kuropean Division.
Mr. Hunt's assignment was coordinated and directed ° .
by Mr. Thomas Karamessines, the Assistant Deputy Director
for Plans. With regard to operational duties, Mr. Ryan ~
was unaware of any specific project or target for Mr, . ©
_ Hunt. Mr. Ryan made the specific observation that if
*. Mr. Hunt produced positive intélligence on the Ibefian ~
“<target during this period the officials. responsible: |
. for ‘this effort within the Western European Division
‘were totally unaware of it. | oe rr

3. Mri Ryan’ stated=that. most of his ‘knowledge of

. Mrs Hunt’s activity’-and the nature of his assignment.

_during this period came: more through heaysay than. . wo
direct official knowledge.. For example, he cited the

* conment nade “by ‘a. mutual acquaintance of his and Mri‘
Himt’s to the effect that Mr. Hint stated: that while

in Madrid he was going to "play golf and write books.”

Nr. Ryan was asked specifically whether or not he was .



--- Page 11 ---
14-0000

so: om, hos
a (7 av)

. under the impression that Nr. Munt's
were either being encouraged or subsid d directly
_ by this Agency in any viticraal-ertort. Me. Rysa res
sponded that he was personally not aware of any such
“He added aS an expression of personal
“tunt had no operational function and
d ithe opportunity. to write books for
Government expense during this

serie

- arrangement. - te
opinion that Mr-
was simply graate
his. own personal gain at
period, 2 ee

Lawrgncé J. Howe 7

e pre

Pe cesR te bee aseartmmtndumatiente Met hattee ne

3.
f.
3
4
4
i
§
i
¥
_&
3
i
d



--- Page 12 ---
f
14-0000 : °

NAME ANDO ADORESS

ontcr. Repty. {|
[oisratcw. | RECOMMENDATION

RETURN

| Remarks: —~

a eater eeit eae nny

FOLO. HERE TO.RETURN TO SENDER
"NAME, ADORESS AND PHONE -

rers® 237 te

an t


--- Page 13 ---
14-0000

=~ bewrs Ma

ks EGM-CUASY TOR FS Ano pegtron |
: ; a eroary

. ‘ wi

D6 Fly 10, FLIER
22 February 1974 | : aoe 4 . ; \
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

SUBJECT: Conversation with Sam Halpern.

. p Paes met. ‘with Sam Halpern for about 20 mMinutés this morning
in GG10, where he is- cleaning up some details before. he goes to pote
‘his new ‘assignment as DC/DCD. I told him generally about our aan i an
attempt to reconstruct Howard ‘Hunt's assignments and financial . 2a
tions, and asked him particularly for recollections he may me Ee on

tra

have of Hunt's assignment in Spain in mid- 1965 to the: fall of 1966.
2. Halpern said, that he has no recollection about such an
_assigament.’ In June 1965 he moved from WH Division with Des

- FitzGerald when he becamé-the DD/P. “At.about that time |

Halpern's father died and he was in New York for the funeral ©

and-ten days of religious observations following that.- He was back

_ in mid-June. and in and out from: then on as he got ready to, attend

the National War College which began i in August, ° He did not roturn
to” o that office until the end of June 1966. Sons

J . “3. Halpern observed that-during ‘this period Karamessines
was ADDP with Helms moving up to be DDCL. He-thought it entirely |
possible’ that ‘Helms and Karamessines could have. handled this
on theirown. |

api dh gent

a 4 fidipern said. that Evan 1 Parker had come into the office’ .
of the Db/P shortly before Helms became. DDCL,_ and had returned
from Honolulu. fof that. purpose. He stay ed on for ‘FitcGerald until .
Halpern’ returned fromthe National War College. He suggested
someone might talk to Evan Parker who may have known something ©
“about i it (although he” may hot). He also Suggested: talking to ‘Georgia.

t=2
“oY.

asp 8.0. Be 7
_— S. D. Breckinridge

* wo : 8 , .
. Y .
. : = - = ex av Sed / EE |

i wt


--- Page 14 ---
14-0000

0 . YS - rane : . c¢

7 ; . 26 Fale 12, ere
, : : _ 21 February 1974 © : .

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD , Te OT so 3 .
SUBJECT: - Watergate+-Frank A. O'Malley i ne Po

“ . 2. At 3 p.m. on the afternoon of 19 February 1974,
Mr. Frederick N. Evans -and Lawrence J. Howe’ interviewed ~~
Mr. Frank A. O'Malley at his. residence, 6419 Lakeview
‘Drive, Falls Church, Virginia. Mr. O'Malley retired ©.
from this Agency in June of. 1972. Prior to retirement .°. -
Mr. O'Malley was an officer in the External Employment «= :-°
Assistance Branch, Retirement Activities Division of oo
the Office of Personnel. It was Mr. O'Malley's function nd
to assist personnel retiring from this Agency in. finding
post-retirement employments “In this capacity Mr. O'Malley) 2:

‘had been. instrumental in the placement of Mr. E. Howard: © -
Hunt in the Robert R. Mullen. public relations firm. The
purpose of this interview was to attempt to determine if
additional information could be developed from Mr:_O'Malley — :
with regard to the placement of Mr. Hunt with the Mullen’. -. ee re tt
Company. a mo, _ : re

"2, Mr. O'Malley began thé interview by recalling

the nature of his past Agency associations both with Mr...

.Hunt and the. Mullen Company.. Mr. O'Malley stated that ~~

prior to assuming his responsibilities in the Office of |

‘Personnel he Had -served with Ceatral Cover Staff in the a

area dewling with the funding of covert action projects. .. °

In this capacity. he had become fanilier with ‘the acti- °~”

-vities-of Mr.:Huat while Mc... Hunt functioned: on the Covert. | ~
<\-Attivitics Staff primarily. in the propaganda field: Mrs

O'Malley stated that. he first came in contact with the “. :

Nullen Company whén “he was attempting to find an organi- -

zation to handle the public relations effort of a covert

Agency activity known’ 2s. the Free Cuba Comnittee. Mr_

O'italley related that he. had arranged this cover through -

the Christianform Organization and that his cuties in-

volved all aspects of the funding of this activity. Mr.

O'Malley described the nattre of his working relationship

Veta ey



--- Page 15 ---
14-0000

with Sir. Robert R. Mullen as being.close and cordial.
ley stated that Nr. Mullen sas in the habit
of confiding to hin information conceraing other Mullen
business. contacts and projects. In Tesponse to a
- specific question, Mr. O'Malley’ stated that during the
period of his contact with thé Mullen Company dealing
with the Free Cuba Committee, Mr. Mullen told him the a .
Howard Hughes Organization was a client of the concern, Loa a

- .\ , 3+. Mrv O'Malley. reiterated his prévious statements
“y~ that Mr. Hunt was referred to his office for placement
assistance through the’ Office of the Executive Director,
then Colonel L.°K. White. Mr. O'Malley. stated that in
“view of Mr. Hunt's interests in the public relations — :
field, it was thought advisable. to put Mr. Hunt in touch Lobe
with Mr. Robert Mullen for the purpose of gaining the _ !
benefit of Mr. Mullen's guidance.: Mr. O'Malley recalled,.
after the initial meeting, Mr. Mullen mentioned having

met Mr. Hunt some yea?'s. pr viously in Paris, France.

Mr. O'Malley's. office. arranged Anterviews vith variods
organizations: including Reader's Digest aad the Kennecott
Copper. Company. Through the offices of the Mullen Company:
an interview as arranged. .with- the General -Foods Corpora- ~
tion, a Mullen client. Mr..0'Ma ley stated. there was ©
disappointment that Mr. Hunt had been unsuccessful in
“selling himself" during any of these interviews and that”
no job offers had resulted. In, response. to a question

‘as to whether or not executive level: interest was still
being shown in Mr. Hunt's post-employment placement,

tr. O'Malley recalled that Mr. Richard Helms, then

. Director of Central Intelligence, was listed as a charac-
ter reference on Mr. Hunt's resume and that:Mr.. Helms.
signed a letter of recommendation to the Kennecott Copper
Company on Mr. Hunt’s behalf.* Mr. O'Malley ‘recalled being
contacted in the last month ‘of Mr. Hunt's Agéncy service b
“Mr. Mullen, who stated that a ‘decision had been-made-to --
expand. their operations.’ In view of this: pansion, Mr.
Mullen chad decided he would hinself offer Mr’ ‘Hunt: a. job.

_ Me. Mullen had-stated that lie’ was ‘interested! if
Hunt begin work immediately. Howevery,
called that Me. -Hunt completed -retirenent.
actually started work for

-a,weeX to 10 days later.



--- Page 16 ---
14-0000

4, Me. O'Malley stated that contact was meintaiaed
with Me. Hunt while at the Mullen Company on a contiauing

. basis, because Mr. O'Malley was interested in Nr. Puat

~-—-->-~ for possible referwal of other‘Ayency retirees. Nr.
O'Malley also understood that there was Cover and. Coa-
“mercial Steff interest in the Mullen Company, and that
Nr. Hunt: became instrumental in discussing several aspects
of the cover operations in his capacity as an officer of
the company. Mr. O'Malley recalled referring various
Agency officers to Mr. Hunt for guidance: when these -indi-
-viduals expressed an interest in ‘entering the pudlic
‘relations field. Mr. O'Malley did recall disappointnent

“cin feelinz Mr. Hunt had generally been less hélpful on

- these occasions. ae : re : i

requesting referral of retiring Agency employees with’
specific qualifications. These instances occurred apparent-
ly after Mr. Hunt had assumed his responsibilities with
the White House. In one instance Mr. Hunt requested re-
ferral of a recently retired Agency secretary. As in
previous memoranda and discussions, Mr. O'Mailey was unable
to. recall the name of this. individual. He. did, -however, -
state that he is quite certain Mr. Hunt turned down the:
individual whom he referred: .As a point of clarification,
Nv. O'Malley said that this individual had not previously
been known to Mr. Hunt, nor had she previously worked —
for him in any capacity. Mr. O'Malley. also recalled a ..
request from Mr. Hunt for an individual having skilis in
the area of locks’ and surreptitious entry. A resume of
Mc. Thomas €. Amato was provided to Mr. Hunt at that time.
It is Mr. O'Malley's recollection that Nr. Hunt specificall
stated that a person-with Mr... Amato's qualifications was
.in connection-with a requirement ‘of the Howard
Organization. in Las Vogas, Nevada.: Mr. O'Malley —_
stated the opinion that it was his impression that the.
cuties. inval¥ed vould include the: monitoring of a listening
device in an undisclosed location. Mr. O'Malley reiterated
_ his understanding: that ‘Mr.:Anato did not accept Mr. Hunt's ~
. effexr of cmployment. uo : . an

os

, Mr. O'Malley then recalled request from Mr. Hunt

| fora recommendation of a security. service organization
“to carry out an electronic countermeasures "sweep." Mr.-
O'Malley recommended the Wackenhut Corporation... Mr. .

”
usr

5. Mr. Hunt contacted Mr. O'Malley on several occasions



--- Page 17 ---
14-0000

~ had not' referred William Shea to

satisfaction

Yu

O'Malley recalled that Hr. Hunt expre

with that suggestion im part because o Hunt
Viewed as that firm's politicat crient an. Me. O'Malley

did not elaborate further oa that remark. Mr. O'Malley
then suggested the use of Anderson Security Consultants,
Incorporated, a commercial cover entity of the Office of
Security. Mr. O'Malley stated that insofar as this”
organization was advertised in the yellow pages and that
Mr. Huat could be assured of the reliability of the ser-
vices, he felt this to be a reasonable suggestion. Mr.
O'Malley stated that during a subsequent phone call when
Kir. O'Malley asked how his suggestion had worked out, ¢
ur. Hunt. responded, "Yes, they had done a fine job."

‘At this point. Mr. O'Malley was asked whether or not fron

his associations with Mr. Hunt he felt. Nr. Hunt was in
the habit of making glib comnents which were not neces-
sarily accurate in order to pass over a subject. Mr;
O'Malley stated that. this was categorically so. He said

_he was sure that Mr. Hunt had lied to hin on a number of .

occasions and that,therefore, he was in no position to

-be sure that Mr. Hunt had actually, in fact, uscd. the

services of Anderson Security Consultants. Mr. O'Malley.
volunteered the inion that he suspected the electronic
countermeasures ep" was to be carried out in the. offices

of the Committés to Re-elect the President... .-

7. In response to a question 2s to whether he had

: ever referred anyone to McCord Associates, Mr. O'Malley
replied that he remembered having referred Walter Brayden.

Mr. Brayden for a time acted asbodyguard to Mrs. Martha

‘Mitchell. As an aside Mr. O'Malley mentioned that Mr.
‘Brayden had refused to carry a fireara in Spite of the

fact that Mr. McCord told him he could do so on the author-

ity of the Attorney General. Asked specifically if he had - .

'.ever referred either Willian Shea or Teresa Shea to Mr.. .
McCord, Mr. O'Malley Stated that‘he did not recall specif- ..

ically referring Teresa Shea and that he was sure that he

im. So, centrary to
Previous statements, it is now O'Malley's belic£ that —
in all probability Mrs. Shea Was not.referred by this

Agency to Mr. McCord. a : : . a

a

een tee



--- Page 18 ---
14-0000

8. Ret. .ning to Mr. O'Malley's pivious responsibdilitics
-in coordinating funding for the covert action activities
.Of Mr. E. Howard Huat, the issue was raised as to whether
Or not the funding of Mr. Hunt's projects continued beiveen
July 1965 awd September 1964 while Nr. Haat was a contract
cnaployee stationed at Madrid, Spain. Nr. O'Malley recalled
that at the tine of Mr. Hunt's signment.to Madrid the
statement disseminated for. consumption within the Ageacy
was that Mr. Hunt was retiring. Mr. O'Malley stated that.”
this was not génerally believed. Mr. O'Malley was quite:
certain that duzing this period his office handled no’
project funding for Mr. Iiint. In response to specific |
question Mr. O'Malley stated that on Nr. Hunt's .Teturn to
staff cmployment. the projects and funding which stopped in
-July 1965 were again resumed. Mr. O'Malley was not aware
f any project names or funding mechanisns or post-assigament
:accountings in connection’ with “Mr,, Hunt's activities in .
“Madrid. , me : 2 .

. ~ ann
N eedack OY Zien a
Frederick N. Evans ©

ce J ws ee Riieenes
Bos ° ~ Lawrenéd

J. Howe

Pri



--- Page 19 ---
14-0000

take
; : . ae ioe
Ss re TT 21 February 1974 shes

a —_ , -MENORANDUM FOR THE RECORD | ;
a _ SUBJECTS. - Office of Finance Rocords - - B. Howard Hunt :

: 1. On the instruction of Mr. Steven L. Kuhn, Chieg
“ - 7 1 O£ Qparations, PSI, the undersigned made an appointment

foe for tha afternoon of 20 February 1974 to interview Mr.

J Willian Caufield, Chief, Certification and Liaison Divi-

fd sion, Office of Finance, and Mr. Joseph Hudson of Pinance

Foe ~ ..6n tha subjact of Mr. B. Howard Hunt... At the outset of . oe

b “the interview Mr. Caufield advised’ the. undersigned that - a

. instruction had been received from the Director of the . -

7 Orzicea of Finance, Mr. Thomas Yale, that. discussion on
tha ‘subject of-Mr. Hunt was to be carried out’ on with
the -O£fice.of-the Inspector General. “Mr. Caufh Stu
that he had’ informed Mr. Yale of the requested interview : .
and had received this instruction with the suggestion to :
that the undersigned contact Mr, Yale. diroctly with any .

inqul ry.

2. Accompanied by ur. Caufield, the undersigned
briefed Mr. Yale on the natura’ of the. request and idan-
‘tified tha "Task Force" effort haing undertaken by the
Office of Security” in concert with the Offices of the |
“Inspector Genaral. and Logisiat ive Counsel. Mr. Yale.
réspondsd that. he ¥ecognized the legitimacy. of. the. ine a
quiry.-: Mr. Y dined. that Sudsaquent. to: ‘initiation .
of the completes audit being ‘ondertaken by Mr. Quinn-of ©:

> the Audit Staff; the. Devuty Director..ror. Management, ‘and
' Services, Mr.: Harold L. Brownian, had requested the -~
Office ae Finance. to. ontinue: their. investigation of

oMy.-Hunt to avoid auplic tion. -Mzr. Yale. added paren-
thetically that it was the naturs. of Finance Orficers-
not to leave a job half dona and that en "informal".
inquiry iatd Mr.-Hunt’s financial records had -neverthe- .
less, ‘continued at a more subdued pace. ves i yo

'

82 INPDET
CL HY 031696



--- Page 20 ---
14-0000

fe

3. A review of tho circumstances. surrounding Mr.
Hunt's’ éonversion to Contract Type A employment and
_ . gnment was then undertaken by Messrs. Yalo, Caufiold,
_ . Hudson and the undarsigned. The contract and payroll
‘ “-- -- €¥20e3 of Mr. Hunt ware reviowed for possible indications
oF the. nature of the operational activity undertaken in
UA-review of traval vouchers.indicated that Mr.
3 family made accountings indicating daparturs
gton,.D.-C., on 5 August 1965 with an-arrival
. d;“Spain, on.16 August 1965S. Tha'costs of this
travel were. charged ‘to the budget of the Western Heni-
sphere Division, Ceputy Directorate for Plans, Madrid |
‘ >" Stagion Support account, A subsequent accounting sum- ——
yO marized PCS travel expensss and included a' payment for ae
” . apartaent rental for 16; 17 and 13 August 1965 with a
. ‘payment ia the amount of $125 to Mr. Fl Raid Buckley for

this purpose.

! 4 It was datemined that an ‘allottee bank account
co in Mr. Hunt’s' name had baen established at the Riggs.”
* : . National. Bank of Washington, ~All salary and other non-
operational reimbursements were made. to Mr. Huat through .
sterile check to this- account, An. oporational account
was establishad gdr Mr. Hunt with ‘the Chaso Mackattaa. Oo
ra) ‘ Bank of New York City. <A review of ai1 payments made to —
_ Mr. Hunt through the Chase bank account through Mr. Hunt's 5 7
So gyarational advance: subsidiary ‘account, or 144Z account, | -- .
had Een. nade. Thote wag no record of any operational
accounts ox! advances ‘being pro¢assed through this channel.”
Ns... Yale) stated that this fact defined his concern. He
felt, that’ ‘at was inconceivable that Mr. Hunt could hava" .
> pnd ortaxe nm operational. activity without some transfer of | .
: - oT. accounting for funds, To date, no such records have .’”
a been de syeloped. No refarence to a project or ‘project
a ; digrash or operational FAN number has been located. Al _
ne ‘+o. expanses connected with Mr; Hunt identified to data were.
a "charged to the Madrid Station Support.. ‘A review made of
Madrid’ Station records. has not indicated any “Developmental -
74 dtunity (D870)". finds. or “Other Opera-
ctivity (COA)" ‘funds expended by-.or on Sahat of.
Mr. Hunt. Thase two accounts Would normaliy be ths source
of dparational funding. not char ged against a specific pro=  «”

ject. act Avitye -



--- Page 21 ---
14-0000

oe (. - a Hy

S.A roview of all of tha traval vouchers on record
T. itunt during this Period also failed ty identify
a projact. In addition to the PCS and Teturn vouchers,
.t oy two othor 3ccountings are oy Tecerd. Gno accounting __
ai “covered a trip by the entire Hunt Fanily to Paris "for:
: the renowal of visas." A second voucher covered a TDY
“trip trom Madrid to Washington with Toturn to Madrid _ .
nade by Mr. Hunt from 5 January to 3 January 1966, The . .
voucher states in the spacs Provided for the elitation of .¢ ‘
ths travel order nunber = "no travel order," The account~ — i
| ding was approved and’ signed by Mr, ‘Thomas Xaramessines,
then Deputy Director for Plans, No Justification or.’ :
- pratement Of purpose for this TOY was given on the accout- .
"dag. A a oo

“"! Sources or identification of Operational funding was fa
+ order. Mr. Yazg ga7e ‘instructions that the entire 1442.
. . advance account o . r
- Channels of. funding outside of tha New York Chaso Account.
After discussion, “it was agreed that particular attention
bs taken to any items connected wita publishing or book.

. royalties. Mr, Yale noted that the ‘royalty offsot Waiver
Provision amended to. Mr. -Hunt's fontract was, in his: exe

he _ (27. Mere Yale was’ inforned. by the undorsiyned: of the .
; . intention to interview Mr, Edward Ryan, currently Calef, . . foe
: Division D,.. who was at the time of Mr. Hunt's Madrid ‘assigns. |. a

bo. ‘ment, Deputy. Chiof of tha Vestern Hemisphere Division. Mr. “
JP te _-Xals suggested that Mr, Davis Powell also be interviewed. ~ - a :
4 * The undarsiged Anforndéd: Mr.-Yale that this had beea dona |
and briered Mr, Yala on the generally negativs results of.: *
tho interview, MreYale then recommended that Mr. San
Halpera be interviewed, Mr. Yale Noted that Mrs Halpern.
“had. been an as3istane to Mr. Desmond Fitzgerald when the.
‘latter was’ Chie£, Vestern Heaisphere Diviston and had ac~'
. Sompanied Mr, Fitzgerald when he:becane Deputy Diractor for
Plans. Mr. ¥als recalled. Mr. Pltzverald’s
Bassing that Me Halpera 72 and acted as- _
aa Executive Officer For Raranesszines. ir, Yale. ° ba Es
© froa hi3experionce,. Mr. Karaiessines would =
fegated all the. arranging of "details Surrounding |
ignaeat suchas Mr. Hunt's to-Mr. Halpern. jy, Yale

S . What he iaterpreted to be Teticonce to ‘dat® to intervewy ; oo Sys
+ 7 OMES Haloesa. an Ce . Oe a

7 3
-- " on
SUIT IT RTT YZ


--- Page 22 ---
14-0000

AT ERAN REIN

8. The undersigned assured Mr. Yale that he would be
informed of any information identifying any possible projact
activity developed in subsequent investigation. Mr. Yale
stated that any information in this area would greatly
facilitate the job of checking computorized “financial
records.

Lawrence J. Howe

4
ry

Set aia
Sister eae ne

weed ace ie Nee eae

aug ean toaating, dete eteanapigtegnuetnapone aye



--- Page 23 ---
14-0000

ran

:
_

CHASE NARHATTAN BANK ACCOUNT oO ot
\
1
“Check Now Bate, - . Payee / “ARount :
“" g  80 eéteber, 1965 |, Unknqun 5 > $1,650.00
(2 months rent ‘as deposit plus 1 month.
in advance at $550 ‘per month, Substan=-
- tiated by leas#) : :
5° 26 November, 1965" - ‘casa “Guggenbuht . $

(for storage of trunks: during 3 mos.
‘temporary. hhousing)

lo 10 December, 1965 — beourtty Storage Co. $ 1,070.82

(£inal destination charges per “attdched »
‘invoice, Insurance charge, of $1,00 is
personal expense. ) : .

nses

/ November 18, 1965 Flowers for BERS de Nax Borrell . “Peas. “150 _
| December 20,1965 Dinner at House of Mings ° c* Ptas. 2250--

'. Ex+Bolivian Ambassador and wife. ; mo,
(Pex ny jetter of 21 Degember, 1965)



--- Page 24 ---
14-0000

WE Previa e ne ee ee

SERVICES OTHER THAN ssc” Terence. s. _ CRABAN AC _ . | VINO F tLbauie
neh OF ECSENDITUCE = ATTACH RUCKIPTS AND UTREA SUPPORTING DOCILATS , ——_—

18 Nov 1965 Flowers for Sra, de Max Borrell. Pesetas 150 @ 60/$1 00 - $2.50
20 Dec 1965 Dinner at House of Ming. Ex-Boliyian Ambassador and wife. :
: Co Pesetas. 2250 8 60/$1..00_-_$37.. 30-% ——~ -—-|-—40500--}-

# For » operational security reasons a ‘receipt | was not obtained. : .
! ao (credit tho 1h.2 advance account.) oo oe to ;

i| 2] teehee

““ATIFY THAT THE DISBURSEMENTS ITEMIZED ADOVE WERE NECESSARILY MADE BY ME IN THE CONDUCT. plaster 2
ERIC IAL AUSINESS .OF. A CONFIDENT FAL, EXTRAORDINARY, OR EMERGENCY NATURE. THAT 1 Have “NOT

a .
oe.
MUS non WIL 4 DE, REIMBURSED THEREFOR FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE, ANO THAT THIS CLAIM AND AT: SIGNATURE OF PAYEE
THMENTS ARE TRUE AND: CGARECT. | aloe _ Glee seus mans astnchment)
ny ee YT or ce u?
7 1 CERTIFY. “FUNDS ARE AVAILABLE . APPRO' | approyeD
ner. “y CHARGE FAN ACCOUNT KO» -

ia be op egeee.

6- 2282 6136-1347 (code ‘3)° RECEIPT FOR FUNDS.RECEIVEO
- : . PAYWENT RECEIVED
pare AUTHONIZED SIGHATURE ee A . IN Tet AMQUNT OF
1 B&B. folie ing? Sicnatuae oF [) Pavet Pavel [)acear
COURT O«'t: A . Do . " .
; we/r oe : , a ) ase

71-80
AMOUNT

. DESCRIPTION «
JOVANCE ACCOUNTS 13-27

fete! Alte um
a ee
pipe]



--- Page 25 ---
14-0000

AMA Ere

PCS to Madrid - Per diem/misc exp $998.30
“Air fare’ (self § family) 2,257.50
HHE, POV, etc 7,887.76.
TLA, quarters, etc 6,662.00
Education allowance - 1,440.00"

TDY Madrid/Paris - reentry visa
Air fare only for self & family

PCS to Has - Per diem/misc exp . $ 178.82
Air fare (self § family) 1,394.55
HHE, POV, etc 40,731597
TLA . SS 599.34

Operational entertainment: - Madrid Nov 65
Approved expenditure - LKD - Madrid 1 July. 1966
Total expenditures

Less: advances received (bank deposit, $30,000; ~
re _ cash 33, $00). 7

Gash settlement to close A/C

$18,905.56

384.62

12,904.68

40.00:

1,600.00

$33,834.85

"35,500.00. .

$ 5 334.85


--- Page 26 ---
14-0000

1S February 1974
fo LG Fale 1 BA IE
tt . MENORANDUM FOR THE RECORD ‘ | : :

SUBJECT: Interview of Mr. Davis Powell . i
. on the David St. John Novels A :

. : : | a “y

ue 1. On the morning of 15 February 1974, the

‘ undersigned interviewed Mr. Davis Powell, currently
a Budget Officer on the staff of the Deputy Director
for Management and Services. Nr. Powell is located
in Room 7C18. During 1965 Mr. Powell was Chief of}
Support of the then designated Western European Divie ..
sion. In July 1965 a contract was writton authorizing

- salary and benafits to Mr. B. Howard Hunt for an assigh>
ment under non-official cover to Madrid, Spain. The
purpose of this interview was to determins if Mr. Powell
had aay information on Mr. Hunt's” activities during this:

period.
2. Mr. Powell responded that from his recollection,

it wss Mr. Hunt's habit to deal only with the most seniox

officer availabla. In this casy Mr, Hunt dealt directly
_ with the then Chief of Western Euyopsan Division, Mr. 5

Rolf Kingsley. Mr. Powell states that, in his capacity :

as Chief of Support, any activity undertaken to support . - ot

Mr. Hunt's assignment to Madrid was undertaken second

and thirdhand on receipt of instructions frow Nr. Xingsiey's

office. He further stated that he was never brieZed on

the purpose of Mr. Hunt's mission and could add little in

terms of speculation. Mr, Powell recommendod that Mr.

Edward Ryan, who was then Deputy Chief of Wastern European

Division, be contacted. Nr. Powell also suggested that

Miss Martha Seville be interviewed. Miss Seville was the
-Sxecutive Secretary. in Vesterh European Division during the

time that Mr. Hunt's contract was written and Miss Saville

subsequently served in Nadrid-herself, Mr. Powell under-
: : Stands that Miss Seville is currently assigned te the 4
4 : office of the Chief, European Division. . :

pe ee

Lavrence J. Howe


--- Page 27 ---
14-0000

¢
\ ‘ “
15 February 1978 OO
; Lb Fel ty Tal BO
: MEMORANDUM FOR THB RECORD | . : we . ° - e
i SUBJECT: Interview of Mr. Rogers Brooks _ : :
on the David St. John Novels - _ = |

1. At. 0930 on the morning of 15 February 1974, .
_ the undersigned interviewed. Mr. Rogers Brooks, Chief, weet ce eee
>. Contract Personnel Division, Office of Personnel. a ,
The purpose of this interview was t6 determine if Mr.
Brooks had any information ‘not contained in the Con-

tract Personnel file of Mr. E. Howard Hunt on the . so te
latter’s activities while a Contract Type A employee. mo, ed.

of . 2. Mr. Brooks summarized his recollections by so
8 . saying that, although it was not common practice it . * nA
= was not entirely unusual for highly sensitive contracts - i
. ‘to be administered without the contracting officer being a
made aware of the operational objective involved. . Mr. re:
Brooks stated that he recalls some of the controversy we
involved in preparing the contract dealing with the
question of offset and housing allowance, but he was ret,
unable to recall any of the details. It was Mr. Brooks?
‘suggestion that the Office of Finance be contacted and

that their contract personnel records on Mr. Hunt be.
checked for information. os wet : :

Tee, Lawrence J. Wows 9... ~ ..



--- Page 28 ---
14-0000

1d February 1974

a @ ne a

_ MENORANDUN FOR’ THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Interview. with Mr. Raymond A. Rocca

on the David St. Joha Novels

1. Oa the morning of <7 February 1974 Messrs. ,
’ Fredéricx BVans: and: Lawrence Howe interviewed Mr. Raymond
‘A. Rocca, Deputy Chief, Counter Intelligence Operations. .
: The purpose of tha interview was to follow up on infor-

mation contained in Office of Security files which stated

_ the belief that individuals in the Counter Intelligence
: ' Operations office had knowledge of tha writing activities. ~
of Nr, E. Howard Hunt. This belief was a matter of record”
in the files of the former Security Research Staff and was
attributed to Mr. Paul Gaynor, now retired, and | Mr. Edward

Sayle. : ,

“ 2, During ‘this interview Mr. Roces was specifically | :
-. askad whether or not he had knowledge of the existence of Coote
“any form of official sponsorship or encouragement to Mr. a :
- E. Howard Hunt ‘to writo novels to improve the image of
this Agency. Additionally, Nr. Rocca was asked whether
or not any assistance was ever requasted of the Counter
elligence..Operations offics.to be provided to Mr. Hunt
. ad ever had any relationship
with Mr. Hunt what: “In responss to theses questions °
“on the record" that he has no knowledge

Mz. Rocca responded:
of any such arrangements nor at an, tine was he party to any _
St to Mr, Hunt. Mr.

assistance or any
. Rocca stated that: he had been >> 5
a "most actively concérned ne | 3-was responsible
woe ..° €or handling a variety of tasks ‘categorized under the area
of “setting “the record: straight." In this sense, the "image"
mission of the offica was to counter nisinf fornation. cur- : oe
_ rently in the mediaor otherwise believed to be part of an. 7 :
effort ‘to discredit the Agency. Mr. Rocca feels that any :
assumption that & gaged in any form of Agency _
sponsored: ‘image 3 tivity - probably Load to the
conclusion that: it was done under the Counter Intelligence a ‘
Operations. . Howeyer, . Mr. Rocca enphatically stated that . : , ‘
this was not the case. aot . co



--- Page 29 ---
14-0000

2 : co

3. Mr. Rocca -was.. thoroughly . candid: and cooperative :
during the course of this intervicw. He was unable to ‘
suggest alternate means of attempting to deternine if
any: official Agency sponsorship of Mr. Hunt did in fact

‘ exist. Mr. Rocca did venture the opinion that he felt .
that in all probability an official acquiescence on the. . 4 ,
part of senior officials might have been involved rather . i. i
‘than.an official sponsorship. It was agroed. by all in . é
this discussion that the nature of any informal support

' given to Mr. Hunt would be far more difficult to define
a the. absence of any. formalized. agreements. .

Lawrence J. Howe 7



--- Page 30 ---
14-00000

fo oo ; (-

” re 6 February 1974

me MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD |

SUBJECT: ‘Possible Agency Sponsorship of f the oo : . _ .
“-. = David St. John Novels : BO ee .

re

ter ae

coy 1.- The details suasapizing an interview ‘on 4 February
1978 with Mr. Waltor Prorz’ ex, Curator, Historical -
Tatelligence Collection, werd set forth in a menor: :
addressed to Mr. Steven L. Xuhn dated 6 February 1974. —
Xuha was. briefed by the undersigned on this information.
during: the. afternoon of S February 1974. Later the same.
afternoon, at Mr. Kuhn's direction, a conference was hel
with Messrs. Scott Breckenridge and John Richards of the”
Office of the Inspector General. tay

a 2. “During this conference the speculation was entertained at
that Mr.. E. Howard Hunt had, in fact, been under Agency .
‘sponsorship with the knowledgs of Mr. Richard Helns in his. Come
preparation of a series of spy novels under tho pseudonym, —

David St. John If it can be accepted asa reasonable, - :
supposition that Mr. Hunt had some highly coapartnented ~~ Tog .

| financial arrangement authorized by senior Agency officials = | ,

to write. these books, then it is likely that this relation-_— : ‘

er Be ie ane a ally Yetired, It is
‘Ha: 7 it x _ April 1970, :

5 & John book: appeared |

another’ in 1972, . "These manuscripts

ared during. the. time that Mr. _Huat was.

bere R Mullen Company see,
"7 ae

“

coo ot ee : :
z fete stare mee at ee ate

be
t
E

BA
references to a concern of Senator Baker over an allsged

fo ‘Elagacial relationship between Mr. Helms and Mr. Hunt
". which continued subsequent to Mr. Hunt's formal retirement.

: Senator Baker has reportédly made reference to.a paymeat
wee ass OF -some: thirty thousand dollars with the parson thetical .
Be “Comment that Holas would aot have ‘that amount: of Roney



--- Page 31 ---
14-0000

See borne

rites

Pee Le etter

4
R
f
a
i
g
§
ft

2

dese

“ds the £act that ‘subsequent to publ

Mrs Kuha on the evening of 5 Pebruaty 1974."

to , provide Mr. Hunt fron. ‘his private funds. Mr. Richards
of the Inspector General Staff opinioned that if tha.
Azeacy, had sponsored the St. John ‘baoks a8. J likely.
that Mr. Hunt had 30. informed - Senator. Baker. ote. who

Adding - pessibie weight to. fats Tine: of. spegutation-
: t J

4.

novel, Mr. Hunt published a novel entit
his. old. Agency issued ai:

: Lias, Eds

. Suggestion is that this writing effort was dono by» Mr. Hunt
free of any fiduciary relationship with the Agency Adnvolyed :

. dn the use of the St, John Pen nane.. /

, ° s. Mr. Howard J. Osborn, Director. of Security, was,
briafed on the above by the undersigned in the Presence of:

Layrence J. Howa

y

Prltee cuategee ges

To tiem nteduess Menati,



--- Page 32 ---
14-0000

SUBJECT ©

“right applications in the future."

NEMORANDUM FORE Steven L.. Kuhn ee

7 ‘The. David St. John Novels

On as February" 29 1974, : Mr. Walter Pforzheiner, Curator,:.,

: Historical. Intelligence Collection, was: interviewed by: the. a

undersigned’ concerning his knowledge of a series. of. novels. -
written by. Mr. B.: Howard Hunt.. This interview. was. undertaken
at your request in an effort to determine if Mr.. Hunt had. .
acted in any capacity in cooperation with Counter Intelligence
Operations. It. has previously been alleged in Office of

'" Security records that Messrs. Paul Gaynor and Edward Sayle
“of Security Research Staff, believed that Mr. Hunt. had written
novels at Agency request and that this effort had been known

to MES James Leton, Chief, cr Operations.
. wee sl

. ae Mr. Pforzhoimer provided ‘a ‘verbal sumnary: ‘of. his.
knovledge of Mr. Hunt's fictional writings under the pen.
nane, David St. John. Mr. Pforzheimer stated that when the
£irst St. John book, On Hazardous Dut ‘ appeared in 1965, he

undertook to identify the trie name of the author. Mr. .
Pforsheimer related that. he checked with a sourco in the copy-

“ pight..office only to find out that the true name was net given
‘on the copyright application.- The mailing address given for
: te author was checked against a telephone cross reference .

tory. The addrass. on the copyright application was..:
fdentitied with Mr. HE. Howard Hunt. . Mr. Pforsheimer stated -
that after making the identification, he called Mr. Thomas

- Karamessines and telated his discovery. Mr. Pforzheimer.

“recalled. from the nature of Mr... Karamessines' reaction that —

ho had uncovered: a sensitive matter. of senior officer concern.

lr. P£orzheimer stated that ha then reconnended . to Hr. -

Xaramessines that. "tf the Agency is involved in this thing

why not see to it that Hunt leavss: his address off the copy- — ,
- Mr. ‘Karanessines reportedly



--- Page 33 ---
14-0000

accented the suggestion and Mr. ‘Pfortzheiner recalls ‘that
subsequent copyright applications were submitted without: --i20
‘the address, Within five. minutes of the conversation with-~ -
Mr. Karazessines, Mr. Pforzheimer recalls being called by .-

Mr. Richard Holms, then Deputy Director of Central. Intelligence. .
Mr. Pforzheimer recalls the substance of the conversation as
being, “for Christ sake Walter, this is the first book to.-:
come along and say..something good about the Agency." why

fot leave the Goddamn thing alone." . .

: 3. The undersigned asked. Nr. Pforzhelier, ‘who to his”
knowledge, would be in a position to confirm or deny whether
Mr. Hunt was undsr any form of Agency: sponsorship in his
writing of the David St. John novels. Nr. Pfortzheimer replied
that he was never officially briefed on the matter and that
-orily Mr. Helms. or Mr. Karamessines could provide the answer.
MY. Pforzheimer was then asked if either Mr. Angleton or Mr.
Rocca of Counter Intelligence Operations would have any
knowledge of this activity. Mr, Pforzheimor replied that he.

: doubted ae seriously.

4. Mr. P£orzheimer went. on to relate that he was
Qceasionally tasked to do research for Mr. Hunt. He recalled
on one occasion being asked to research the Indian religious.

ites involving use of funeral pyres, Nr. Pforzheiner .
remembered that this theme figures significantly in Mr. Huntts.
subsequent novel Tower of Silence which appeared under the
St, John pen name in Nr. Pforzheimer parenthetically
pointed out the origin of the pen name as being the names of .
Mr. Hunt's two sons--David and St. John. .

cr OS Tracing Mr. Hunt's career as$ignnents, it is noted
that’ he was assigned to the Office of the Deputy Director
for. Oparations then designated, the DDP/Operations Group, in

: February 1965. The first David St. John book was published

‘during 1965. From June 1965 through September 1966, Mr. Hunt ey
was assigned to Madrid, Spaim as a Contract Agent. During

1966, three St. John books appeared in print, the highest out-

put for any year. Mr. Hunt published one book under the

St. John pseudonym in 1967, en2 one each in the’ years 1963, .
1969,,1971 and 1972. Mr. Hunt officially retired as an Aganey ’

"State. Enployee effective 30 April 1970.



--- Page 34 ---
14-0000

6. A check of Office of Security records did not develop
any indication that ony of the David St. John manuscripts were
ever submitted for review in accordance with Agsncy regulations, é
There is no documentary evidence currently. available to the ~~ .
Office of Security to either confirm or deny possible Agency

sponsorship ,of the books written by Mr. BE. Howard Hunt under
the pen nane,.. David. Sti. :Johns. .- , Cte : .

hg Tewge ft a ee MT _

BMI ge

SEARS SBR RNS te RANI Se ey

eae

soles,



--- Page 35 ---
14-0000

AN .
- te - oo SRUEREL . . Copy ons of one copies
“ . ee ¢

— ( ; (.,

vee eee te ¥Eebruary 1974

a . : ZG FLY, G33
MEMORANDUAL FOR: Mr. Kuhn . ;

SUBJECT: General Gaynor! s Recollections : . a ; ,

. a This date, at your instruction, 1 called Gen. Paul Fe Gaynor
to seek his recollections regarding his knowledge of the writings of | | : on Lo
“. Mr, ‘Hunt and any official who might be aware of the. circumstances i
: of any Agency 3 involvement i in that effort. : .
2. “Gen. Gaynor advised that his memory is not altogether clear °
on the matter, and that he was "reaching, "but stated that has he
. reconstructs the matter: . :

Sm ar. He became aware that Hunt, while in Wu, was ; accomplishing : "
a “steady flow of spy books, and that security approval was not being re-
. quested on the manuscripts before submission to publishers. (He stated"
that this activity continued later, as he recalls it, in CI Staff, and -
| agreed with idea that the volume of writings was sufficient to indicate =
ot that a great of time was involved in Hunt's writing.) Gen. Gaynor advised
* "+" that he raised the issue “up front” on severa! occasions.
he recieved to his raising the issue was that "Keop your stinking nose out
_ of this business." He stated that he was lead to believe that Mr. Helms
u desired to improve the image of the intelligence profession and the Agency = =. .° .
-and that Hunt's books were a part of-the program to do so, - He stated,that
he wes never told outright that this was the case, but the responses be. .

recieved lead him to believe this was the case. : rr!

The reaction

t,

wT. bh. He “suggested that two peaple might “be able to assist in clearing .

the issue, Ray Rocca and Walter Pioraheimer, both of whom were involved,

in the "image" materials. He stated that Pi forzheimér seemed to be aware

of all the details. = on an up to date basis - of Huat's departure from the,

Agency to join the public relations firm, to the degree that Gen. Gaynor

a, . gained the belief that Hunt was merely moving his desk outside the building,

7 but being paid by the same source as before. He also advised that he kept
Miss Ethel Mendoza fairly current on what he was learning about Hunt's

- activities because she followed the case for him, and suggested that her ‘ a .
recall about what he had learned and when and what resulted, might be~- : —
-better than his at this date. (He also mentioned an incident in w hich Morse

‘Allen while on 2 TDY was told by a COS to ask Headquarters to remove Hunt

:cause of his direct Hiaison with the presidunt of the country,

ny station operations, Later, the COS

sage, With the implication that

from the Are:

other activities which were confoundir
told Morse to forget about relaying the m
was being directed by higher authority in the Agency and the COS did not
He said Morse “would rrodably

h to wet ia the middle by complaining,



--- Page 36 ---
14-0000

~
t
iva

Le. He also suggested that another person--detinitely no friend of

Hunt--who might have some recall or have picked up information about

the book-writing matter might be Anita Potocki of CI Staff, formerly of
Division D. ‘(I gather that she'did not have official knowledge, but because
of her dislike for Hunt, she made it somewhat her business to follow his

career;) — . : . a . :
fone . 7 Edward F, Sayle 4
\. .
\ : . .

hed ee.

ce any

weeps ee

REE OIME MEGAN «Soe EET Mie H de Sa ad

TO ene ce eect Cap cc Sm AMMEN oN



--- Page 37 ---
14-0000

* or sek me) . ~~, . .
— a C =
: 26 frite (2 tad >
at Jaan G2 °

. EVERETTE HOWARD HUNT, IR.

i Subject, a.forsier GS-15 Ceerations Cificer assigned
to DDP/Eerepe, is 53 years of age and married, He served with
the Cifice of Str. zategic Services duzing World War B, and was employed
by this. Agency f November 1949 until his voluntary retirement .
oa 30 April 1970. In 1971, Subject served as an advisor to President
Nixoa in relation to his trip to China. Subject is of current intorast

to the Central Cover Stadt. . en

2. Subject graduated from Brow’ University in 1940. He

Sarved with the United States Navy from carly 1941 until lare 1942.

Atter a year with Time, Incorporated, he entered the Air Force,

where he was detailed to the Ciiles of Strategic Services. Ha served

in the Far Hast onti! Janbary 1945, Subject engaged ia writing, and

then from May 1943 until February 1919 was employed by the Economic

Cooperation Administration, serving in Pozis, France, az anaideta ~ ~° >

Avarell Harriman, .

Tae Fs 3. A dSackground investigation sondueted by the Federal Bureau”
of Investigation ia July 1929 revealed no indication of instability on 7
Subject's part, bet it was later learned that Subject had been refased
an increase fo salary with the Economic Cooperation Administration - . .
and had been permitted to resign, He was deseribe 4 as 3 highly satalligeat, TT
but biadl7. selfish and egotistical, : : mo, oe |

so 4, Subjectts wife, Dorothy Louisa Goutiere une,’ was investigated toe -

for Agency ersploymest in 1943. Hox former hasband was desczibed - po 7 |

ay a habitual drankard, and Subdject's wily waa deacribed ag slightly

~unstabls and not ihelined to remain ix one placa for any length of tims.

She did not exter oa eaty, having nesepted a position the Economic
Cooperation Administration iz Paris, Car Paris sonreas later teported . :
that Subject’s wife was former'y his mistress and waa ogenly Mosted . : : ‘
as such fos several months, Ste was then described a3 23 amoral and |
daazerous individual who snllerbandedly 5 attacked thoss persons who

incurred hor eamity. :



--- Page 38 ---
14-0000

te mee

“ha was working on the Cabaa problem and pubiiabing an anti-Castzo

ne .
. . v ‘

: Sudject entered on duly az an Intelliyenca Citicer, G5-13,
Fed ¢

In December 1950 be was assizaed as Thisf
tiasion tare

5.

on 3d.\November 1949,
of Station, Mexico City, aad then served as Chief of %

vatil August 1953. He served in Tokyo, Japan, {rom June 1954.
until Pehrnary 1957, He waa then assigaed as Chief of Statioa,
Montevideo, Uruguay. Subject waa Chici of Stitios ia Moresvidso-
until early 1960. Thars ware indications that Sudjec? attempted

to use his personal influence with the President of Uruguay to have
hia assigament there extended, but he retursed to the United States
in June 1960 and was assigned to Mexico City on Project IMARC.

a i s A ‘cable from “Montevideo, dated 6 November 1960, indicates.
‘that Subjact had written former Uruguayan contacts commenting that

newspaper in Miaral, Is was. recommended that Subject be warned
about such indiscraet: ‘remarks, but apparantly no action was takea,

7. In November 1941, Subject was reassigned to the DDP/
Covsrt Action Siaff, aad in January 1962 to the Cifice of the Caief
of tha same Staff, In Jely 1962 Sudject was transfarred to the DODS
Research and Publications Section in. Naabington and in July 1964 -
to the DODS Covert Action Staff, In February 1985 ha moved to the
Cifice of the DDP/Cperations Group. From June 1985 to September
1986 Subject served ag a Contract Agent in Madrid, Spain, after
which he sarvad in the DDP as Chief of European Covert Operations

-uatil his retirement on 30 April 1979,-

8. On 24 January 1970 a source of the Olfics of Security
‘learned that Subjact was circulating through the publishing comraunity
"Give Us This Day," a manuscript written under hia former opazational
alias and dealing with the events of the Bay of Pigs. Investigation .
discloaad that the manuscript had been ia the ‘possession of Tom Wallace,
of Holt, Rinehart, and Wiaston, Inc. as early as 9 July 1963 and that
it waa sent on “that date’ tow iliiam F. Buckley, Jr., of the National ©
Reviex. The raanuscrip! was sent to the Arlington House aad Waiker
and Company a3 well, Both rajaciad it.as too ‘con:rovorsial, as had TT

Holc, Rinehart, 2ad Winston, .


--- Page 39 ---
14-0000

Je

_ Approval for use b7 Cdatzal Cover Stall y

“weat, Waunaiagte , 2S,

Te ce

G. Subject was iatesviewed redasdlag- tho maausezipi on ‘
17 February 1970 by the DDP. He at\first professad ignorance, bat
whea told the titla admitted ke had writien it for his own Seaefit asa
historleal record. Subject said be had showa the manuacrist about ~
two years ago to bis agent, iMax Wilxissoa, and to Willlam FL. Buckley,
He sald be had oaly waated an opigion from thesa gentleman, asd
added that thé manuscrip: bad been returned to him. He had, te sald,
not wanted it published, Subject was Instructed as to the gaager of such
a manuscript being svblished, acd was to attempt to determine how ‘
many copies of it might be ia cizcalation, le was not to contact Walxar
and Company, who wore the acurce of the original Information,

o

“YO, rn reiavastigatioa « af Subject + was conduciad by the Offica of -
fecurity in Jaly 1970. Subject and his wife were Sesczibed by siss .
neighbors acquaiated with them for up to ‘nine year 3, av excellent
parents, good neighbors, aud { Hoe! comraunity citizens, -

. \ 7,
“12, On 19 Faly 1971, Subject was raported by the Jersey City,
‘New Jevoez7, Jonsral to havs joined the White House Siaff aaa .
Consultant to “President Nizoa prepargtozy fo the President's visit to

. the Psonles Republi¢ of China,

12, On & Noverber 1970, Subject wie grantad a Covert Security
a Rovers R, Mullon and

Company, a Public Ralaticas firm with es at 1729 H Stzaut, North-
Issuiry of tha Geatzal Cover S: avid od 19 Suna
Sudject, aa priacigal

1972 revealed that this fa a cutsent yelationshid,

‘officer of Rohart R, Mulled aad Gompany! is w witting of covey arzange~
meats for two Ayency asseis, James Everett in Amatardam, Netherlands;

ana Arthus Hochberg, fa Singapore a.
. ; i .

13, Habject's security lila teflecta that Sebject haa, in the past,
mes Anglstsn, Chief, CI Staif/CDP,
er, Cn 19 June 1972, Me. Fred
Qt provide idformation 2 asto the :

bean of operational tuterest to Mo, Je
3 tion wiih az operadonal im
sbhard, Cl Stait, advised that
Aagtetoa! ) ae liza’ 33 of Subject.

use of Diz,
A


--- Page 40 ---
14-0000

7 wea a : . :

ane

“+ IEMoRANZOu FoR: Deputy Director for Support.

BUBIECT: " Raguest for Szceptioa to Frovision of
PR 45-10b — Tarenca se CRABATAG oc . ‘
1. This memorandum contaizs a socommendatioa is paras
g=aph, 4 for the approval oz the Baput7 Director Zor & Support.

: — 8, erence ‘s. " caapanac ®) ia a Contract Employee ase
simed to the Madrid area in Strain in a sensitive ausizgnnent
since hin conversion from a St22f Ynyloze2 on 4 July 1965, .
COABAMAS was’ 2 CS-15, step 7 (319,830.00 par annua) and ba
is betns paid:at the gaze vate in his present contract “
status. Sig contract provides that ‘ha will bo entitlad to

, a Living quarters allovance in conformance with regulations
of thig orgsaizuation applicadle to its appolate) personnel. .

‘3. The basic living quarters allovancy for Class If :
oy -. of2izers ina Madrid 45 93,900 ner annum, Tho Louse whica -

moe | CRABAWIC has located, wita a one year levsu from 15 November . a
° 3395 to 14 Movenzar 1953, bas an ananal rent of $5,500.00
gecludias ubstatica. Therefore, Zor rent .sione, he 7212 he

$1,959.00 ver ysar over the 160 vercent maximus alloved : :
gador ine provis fozrs 02:7R 43-105. .Gn a 73/25 percant " x set
snarieg sasis of. the 69 percent over the quarters allovance, _ ‘

“he vould Be out of pocket 32,595.00.

*7 of CRABANAC’s . 4
costs was . a
>. “ress Haranesgiaes, 2 ‘aDD>. On iS Segtexber i
_ADD2, approved ais being relnbursed
re the excess allovacle costs up

+t not to excood, so percent nbove his quarters. 2llowaccea..
wthorizatioa 7 included da a Latter, to SCRABANAC Zroa
saueasines. If 15 requessad trat cha Deputy Dizrector

4, bua to ‘the 9: parational sensitiv



--- Page 41 ---
14-0000

a for Supvert authorizcoa the 75/25 percent sharkag v2 the axceasa
Allowanls costs up to 60 yercant above his quarters allowance. .

LSS.
award Ryan -

Acting chiez *
. Vasteran Surope Divi Division

* Pecensendation in paragraph 40 a
: a9 authorized: — 7 ‘
; ghovsg 4
Chorles I. Dayfs . Cots ue mv wr :
Sapaky ‘Director ver Ben poxe _ TIT Dato. : ot L
x ton Tae fee fe ‘ . . i
DDP/TS/S8:DavisB. Powel1/a3/5189 (Nors5)_
pistribution: a. Oo a
: orig’, = $

ry
4
ae
»
§

Pte mm pine Sent ts mrt oe a



--- Page 42 ---
14-0000

wee

= we’ om

Chie?, Vestera Zurcrs Mivisios

amr > Support Stare .

Cozpensatioa and Tax Division
CPlLee of Finance :

Paty Status Reporta-Tareace 5 8. Canc,
umber 179C80

FePerence : FAB ao-10co-1, paragraph 5.

Tployee oa

b

1

1. 5 date tzers 1s no record o? receipt of Ferss 7h,
Tuty Status Reports, for Tarensea S. C2A9S2C sidce his SCd :
4 culy 1965, These reports ors required in order to maintain -.
his leave 2scount in’ aecorianes wiha the terns of parsgssph

6{c) ef hia contract end to prealuda action to withhol] pay
aacordance vith requirements of tha referenced handboo's, \

t

2. it 19 requested that this o?Mice be advised as to |
the reason Yor the delay in the subnissioa of these Tuty Status

“ASTENTION: Lucille F. Tawgeed

SECU: - Chic? of Support, Had Division

Razorts >
LOCIS FP, TweeceD..
“fhie?, \
Contrast Exployees Acconats 3 Soptien
Bgent Payroll Fr: ,
ZO: . Coyvensation and ‘ax at
8 S237e3 oo Seka Division

Per conversation with te. . Thomas Zaramessines, apse, :

there vill be zo Duty States 5
on?

4

rts (Forn 764) suba a
nce S. CRABANAC. Tats scould be used as the aut hority
$0 continue big tay vithout thess réports. © Los

. RP

Davia S. Yowell

Cnie2 of Sun por
WS Division



--- Page 43 ---
14-0000

3 Sententer 1955

.

HEMORAIDUM FOR: Chief, Contract Personzel Divisioa

SuBJcCcT - ¢ General ~ Terrence S. CRABANAC - Supplstent

Specific - Paragraph Batttled "Orfset"

i
i

1. ‘This office herein recomends an n andends zent to CRABATIAC's ~

. Supplemen’ dated 4, July 1955,.to delete paragraph 7. entitled "ozesat."

*, 2. This office acknowledges the oe opinion, Reference A, watch —
Getermined CRABANAC may retaia without Asency salary offset any future
royalties earved as a result of his literary efforts based on the Zact
cover doza not include role of a writer. .

3. As Subjects cover "ectivities" have been oficteity clarified _

3.

a3 being only a light oze of a retired Foreiga Service Orficer for

‘waich the Ageacy will b+ making all entitieceat pnaycents and actually

bs will receive no funds from any cover, this paragrapa, which is aisleadiug,
has no reaniog in Subject's contract and it is hereby reconsended thas

it b2 deleted fron CRABANAC'S. Sugplezens.

k, Farther, in future cases wien 3 cover fs so light that Subject -
will not be receiving funds fron cover it is recommended that no "OP2set"
paragraph be : included: in Supplecents or Contracts. Lome ent

. . LIN . ciuir EID .
ve Chier, Covert Clales Branch

Abtachzent -
Ral. A and B.

R A. OGC Optotos 65-2h78a, dated 2 August 2965 | eee
2 - - 0 Be Our Meno, datea 8 3 duly 39s) Save Subgeet



--- Page 44 ---
14-00000

“cover activitiés." 4

a ad
~
}
¢

MEMORANDUM FOR: ‘Chief, Contract Personnel Division

SUBJECT: Terence ‘s. CRABANAC - Retention of

Royalties by a Contract Employee

~ 1, You have requested the opinion of this Office in regard to
the retention of future royalties which might be earned by Terence S.
CRABANAC as a result of his literary efforts. We believe that he is
entitled to retain such royalties without an offset against his Agency

s alary.

2. We have been advised ‘by Mr. Gene Stevens, WE/Support, that
CRABANAC's cover does not include the role of a writer; CRABANAG's
cover for status will only bea light one of a retired Foreign Service
Officer. Therefore, paragraph 7 of his coatract dated’ July 1965 may
remain as written, Royalties from the fictional works that he writes as.
a profitable hobby will not be: emoluments received, from or through his

Temes 0. Beak.

JORMAN D. BLOCK
. Office of General Counsel

cc: Chief, Covert Claims Branch
Mr. Gene Stevens, WE/Support
: ey



--- Page 45 ---
14-0000

Ne
b.

vide a basis of attribution for.some of his income.

cary

3 AUG IAF

MEMORANDUM FOR : Offices of General Counsel

Normaa Blocic

ATTENTICN

Terence S. Crabanac --
Reteation of Royalties by
- a Contract Employee

SUBJECT

1. Reference is mace to the telephone conversation

" o£ 25 July 1965 between yourself and Rogera C. Brooks of

this Office wherein background inforreation relating to the
assignment of Terence S. Crabasac was discussed. .

2. Subject will apoarently develop a cover asa writer,
a field wherein he hae an already demonstrated taleat based
upon several pudlications. The objective of the cover is to pro-
At the time
of the preparation of Mr. Crabazac's contract, the specific
Getail of his cover was unknown.”

an 3. Request your opinion in regard to the retention of
poasible royalties earned by Crabanac as a result of.nis
literary efforts or whether such income should be proparly ©

offset.
a me . _Sosepb B. Ragan .
Chief, Contract Personnel Division: ~
Attachments. -

OP/CPD: RCBrooks/ew: 2 August 1985

Distritzution: :
Orig & 1 -- Addressee
2 -- CEN

eae a


--- Page 46 ---
14-0000

-regulations: You may be entisled 2

“assignment. All travel, transporintion aac gerd

Cc

>

Myr. Terence S. Crabanac

ee

Dear Mr. Crabanac:

’ The United States Government, 25 represented by the Contracting
OSicer, hezeby contracts with youas a Costzact Employee for the use
of your services and tho performance of duties of a confideatial nature

- under the following terms aad conditions:

en genaa ton. In falt consideration for the use.of your servdess -
ana the peviormmaace of specified confidential dutiss you will be compen-
sated in an ‘amount calculated at the rate of $19,830 per annum. In addition, '-
you are herein authorized lagislative salary adjustments, within-grade
promotions and, if applicable, a post differential ia substantial conformance |
with rules and regulations applicabls to Government appointed employees.
Payments will be made a3 requested by you in writing in an apovoved man-
Taxes will be withheld therefrom aad submitted by this organization. _

ner.

2. Allowances. You will be entitled to: ta) Living quarters allow- ra
ances in conformance with regulations of this organization apolicadla to
its appointed personae!. In the event you are furnished quarters by the
Government you will rot be entitled to the living quar ters allowances herein»

indicated. - -

{(b) Gost-of-living allowances .

in, conformance with. ‘applicable regulations of this organization including, | °
but not limited to, a post allowance, a transfer allowances aad 2 home Bez t

vice transfer alowance.

3. Travel. You will be advanced or reimbursed funds for travel:
and transportation expenses far you, your desencests,. your household |
effects and your personal automobile to and imom your permanent post’ |
of assignment, ‘and for you alone for authorized opezational tra Ia
addition, you will be entitled t6 storage of such household and personal
$3 as are not shipsed, in Sonformance with eoplicable Goverarment
per diem in lieu of subsisteace in.

the course of all travel performed te reuader and, whee authorized, for :
> permanent post of .

you alone while oa temporazy duty away from your
ma provided for under

a
» and expenses incurred here-
ting in comolinace with apolicabdla

eliec

this paragraph must be proserly author
under are subject to payment and accovati
Goverameat regulations.

nat timined to, entermin-
ally agorovell dy the
to payment and accounting in com

for necessary eperati
mentaad the purchase o of infor:
evament, Such funds will b: 3u
ance with applicable Government regal

It lo recayrized teat yore failure lo ace
y monies adsacs
weil ths rpabassauat ef s
Sabena ly ye
SEGA OTE Lae



--- Page 47 ---
14-0000

. ineur
of duty whila abroad. St I

dncurred by tha dependents ofa United States cit

ita. (a) You will be entitled to death and disability bonefits
equal to those authorized uader the Federal Employees’ Compeasatioa Act,

Claims by you, your heirs, or logal representatives under
Aan
tur ita-

aa amended.
this paragraph will be processed by this orginization in accordance w.

procedures in such manner az net to impair Socurity. .

7 _ (bd) You will be entitied to the continuance of pay and’

slowancés ina. mannes ylimilar to that 94% forth in the Missing Parsons

Act ($0 U.S.C, Ay App. 410901 - 1015).

{c} You will be entitled to- sick, annual and hore. leave

(including travel exoenaas incidant thercto) equal to and subject to the game

-rule3 and regulations applicable to Government appointed employees.
. Annual leave may only be taken at times aad places approved in advaace by -

appropriate Government representatives. All accrued but unused leave

credited to your former account.aa an appointed employee of this organiza- |.

tion will be traasferred'to the Ie ave account established for you hereunder .

. Aa) As a Government employee undez contract converted |
from staff status without a break in service, it is required that yau continue
to make contributions to the Civil Service Retirement Fund. Such contri-
butions (presently six and one/half per cent (6-1/2%)) will be deducted by
the Government from tha basic compensation due you hereundez »i.e., ut

presently $19 860 perannaum. . : .

: {e) You are herein authorized to apply for enrollaient |
in a health insurance program for certain selected Contract Employees of -
this organization, sibject to all the terms and conditions of that proyram. -
If accepted, this organization is presently authoriz ed to bear a portion of |
the premium cost, you will bear the rernainder.’; Your financial contribution
will be effected either by payroll.cdeduction or by-direct remittaace at
periodic intervals to be established by this: organization. i

w (1) Tais organization, is authorized to pay the cost

red by a United States citizen full-time Contract Employee i in the Ming |

a) This organization may pay certain necessary
a avel éxpenses for. illness or injury
Sen full- time Contract
while they are located abroad.

costa of hoapitalizaiion and re siiied

Employee permaner ily assigned ‘abroad,

understood aad agreed that the eligibility nd extent of the participation

s
by you and your dependents in te above medical programa will be in.con-
formance with the rules, regulations and policies of this organization ta

effact at the time an illnesa.o njery i ig incurred, that all chima will de
submitted only to this organization aad that adjudication of such claims by

this organization snall be final aad conclusive. |

x ind) received foam ur
the 3. S. Gavernment.

hag hen

7 Olfses. Esnoluments ( nelalia

through your cover activitias ar
meas hie ouch emoluments ae

act to be payment by the Govern~

i 3 F Federal income hae purposes. Lo caver sinotsnents
you wlll dispose of Sis acess

nae

of necessary hospitalization and related travel expedses for illness oz injury” "



--- Page 48 ---
14-0000

_ and regulations. Lo. : Loe .

—_
. . . . ~ ° .
. ot - >
. t
® Exec. If, fn the berformance of services unter

nia coatract, you ass 2 the. custody of Goverament funds or take tithe

of record to property of any nature whatsoever and wherever situate, which mo
‘property has ia facs dean purchased with monies of the U. S. Government, .
you horeby recogaize and acknowledge ths existence of a trust relationsiulp,.
either express of construct nd you agres to exscute whatever docu-
ments may be required byt the Govern:nent to evidences this relationship.

9. Secrecy. You will be required to keep forever secret tila coatract
and all information which you may odtain by reason hereof (unless released
la writing by the Government fzora such obligation), with full knowledys thal.
violation of such secrecy may sudject you to criminal prosecution unde the
Espionag> Laws, dated 25 June 19438, as amended, and other applicable law

10. Instructions. Instructons received by you from the Government .
briefing, training or otherwise axe a part’of this contract aad are incor-.

porated herein, provided that such instructions are not inconsistent with

. the terms hereof.

: ll. Unauthorized Commitments. No promises | or commitn, ents per-
taining to rights, privileges or benefits other than those expressly stioulatec
in wilting in this agreement or any amendment thereto shall be binding on

the Government. _ . . 3 .
12. Term, This contract is effective as of _4 July 1965 ___, aad shall

continue thereatter for a period of two (2) years, unlega s00ae7 terminated:

_ {c) Without prior notice by tha Government, in the event of a
breach of this contract by your violation of the security provistons
hersof or by your of erwise < rende ving yourself unavailnd!s for :
acceptable Service. . _ . ot. i 7

4

; (a) Upon sixty (50) days’ accual notica by cit, party hereto, or 7 3
(v) Upon actual notice to you in the event the results ofan initially - | :

. required medical sxamination. are determined by this organizatioa ok

to be unsatisiactory, oF -- De . ; ne

i

{

Subject to the availability of aporopviations, this agreement = may be extended
upon notice from the Government. In the event of voluntary termination on 7
:

your part ox termination for cause’ by the Government prior to tke expiration!

of this agreement or aay renc wal thereof, you vill not be entiiie\d to return |
travel expenses to the United States. Terminatisn of this agreement 5 :
not release you from tre obligations of any security oath you may be requizec
to tals. : ,

UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT a

By DL

Coatracting Of

a
a

ADPROYED:


