
--- Page 1 ---
14,0000

| 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 jn,
: o 7

aie epee es hk

SECRET - SENSITIVE

m4 Draft Memorandum to the DCI from William Harvey

Dated 27 November 1962

com.

Do This is not a controlled item oO a
: rnnenernneneeeeemetnenmenentemeneed eee

pon

RETURN TO Oi8
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce

+ US


--- Page 2 ---
14-0000

, Brats sare me “SSE oar

‘om the Cas sad political prengaca
; ot ro/Commertat regina to: retard devel: Sp
the Orbe econcny. and asiatain a drain
on Bloe resources. ;

, d.. Maintain waxiaun |
gars pocusut IS : verage of Cuban inte! tiger >
a requireacats.

| _A SOURCE REPS RENCE
IN CS THISTSRECAL - "e Me _
PAPER h0. e prepares

—D0 NOT DESTROY—
as  wpehetng, eplie ia ¢ | —



--- Page 3 ---
14-0000

Cevextly support the shoye-ettsd ” +B. national

bare

t he’ elligence coverage of Seba:
, wich pertiealar cptasie oa Ste followings

ie

‘davelep’ active as md. Latiowinertemn somtey supp st t



--- Page 4 ---
oy

SESE

Bi

Fegina in Grbs,. in the

ae A og ‘ 4 :

Reaat ahexs



--- Page 5 ---
14-0000



--- Page 6 ---
14-0000

MODAN, Fa trdogy ’

setnzex wvaETHR 4f



--- Page 7 ---
14-0000

{
:

ware faeces ascete ara

2, ae

- AB SECRET
“SESITIVE

ARAUP +
Esetated trem antematic
arent nis oye


--- Page 8 ---
Western Heaisphere, the United States dces bot intend te

[<= SECRET - susirive]

27 November 1962

Note: Discussed 27 Ucyenher
1862 by DD/F with Gl
end approved gener: i:
im principle by FUT,
Fully concurred (ty

; by BD/P.
7 MEMORARO FoR; Director of Central Intelligence -
- TaROUGH: ° Deputy Director (Plena)

SUBJECT: - Operational Plen for Continu! Lng
on Operet tons Against Cubs

3, Action: This memorandua is for your inforastion

‘gnd pursuant to your request, Recommendations for action rrea

contained ia Parugraph V below. The purpose of this memercnn ss:

‘ia to dcolineste an operational pina for the action which we
" believe should be taken by CIA ogainst Cuban fur the predictahls

future, In‘ guamary the plan provides for ccntinuing, even
intensifying, the intelligence effort egeinst Cubs and for
the reorientation of the current effort into » long tern

denied area type of operation of the highest priority.

I, ASSUMPTIONS:

‘A. The United States Government will give public
assurances that, provided no nuclerr or offeusive weapers = 2r
present or re-introduced into Cuba, end provided Cubs deer
not take action to threaten the perce. -ond security of the |

Careers

invade Cuba or support an invasion of Cuba, eee
= SECRET - sensITivE | FRO.
: = D0 BOT prazioy—__.



--- Page 9 ---
14-0000

3 These assurances will preclude eny ‘meaningful CIA
action ‘on a phesed basis to provoke a revolt inside Cubz, sinve
unless there are major changes in operational and internal con-

- ; ditions: in Cuba, such a revolt if provoked would be totally
. destroyed by Cuban counteraction in a.matter of hours or, at
at im few aay unless supported. by. = major, United States
ry om : * the ‘non~invasion assurances
‘es a practical matter will, preclude invading Cuba on the pretext
‘of a contrived provocation such as en attack on Guantanamo.
2Ce CIA, operations: involving a. high noise level anda
* diatiaet ‘elenent of -attributability, particularly paramilitary,
" guerrilly,. ‘and conmande type operations will. be unacceptable
as a matter of ‘policy.
De The Castro-communist regime will remain in power for
‘the indefinite. future, with its security and control apparatus
relatively intact and with the capability not only of crushing
, unsupported resistance activity, but of making operational
. conditions 1a Cuba increasingly difficult. While it. is
possible that recent and future developments including the
Soviet action in removing the offensive weapons from Cuber ary
serve to weaken and discredit Castro, there is as yet no hard
indication that the control of the Castro-comnunist regime over
; Cae ahd toca rabetactiy weakenod, .

., The _Vaited States assurances of no invasion and no

- support of: an invesion will, in effect, constitute giving tc
Castro and his regime a certain degree of ssnctuary. This will



--- Page 10 ---
14-0000

{ i’ severely denoge the aorale and motivation of anti-regine Cubene
| _ both inside sad. outside of Cuba, ‘which will make it ineressingiy
‘ : - dattiouit for us to. recruit agents, maintain agents already
recruited, and. continue or intensify our intelligence and other
efforts against Cuba and the Castro-communist regine.

a o 2a. . Be Despite. the sbove. factozs,; Higher. Authority probably
ye vs wale! gontique ‘heavy: prousure on: the! CxA: for a maxtous | effort

| : . " against, ‘Cuba ‘end may even ‘continue to contend that the ultinste.
4

objective ita the overthrow of the Castro-conmunist regime.
“This ig an unrealistic objective, however, except.on a very
.  long-tera, basis as tie. United States Government, we believe,
. jc ~ will be unwilling in the. immediate future to commit troops
' to support such, an overthrow. The United States Governnent
in ats overt dealings with the Cuben exiles probably will not
"express. ‘the above factors to them in the context or with the
bluntness: stated here,
, |G. In view of these factors, the so-called “Irzek Tro",
. course of action, 14.6., unlimited support of Cuban exiles
and exile ETOUpS. with no real control or objective purposes

in the hope that ‘these groups will be able to shake the

_ Castro regiae will, although unrealistic, become _increzs ing ty

attractive at various levels in the United Sts tes Government.

; q. As & matter of policy, political pressures end
"economic pressures short. of blocksde,. raids, sad | aggressive

sabotage against Gaba: will be continued.



--- Page 11 ---
14-0000

qT. Fi view of the above assumptions prramilitary, command

and sabotage. operations, except in rare selective instonces

will serve Little purpose; also they will be counter-procuct tye
since, it. ‘undertaken, they will make the collection of intelli.
gence more diftzionlt and should. only be undertrken in those very

' few instances. where an ubusually high return can be demonstreted,

Regardless of what other pressures are placed on CIA for
tetion against Cuba, it would ?ppear clear that Higher Authartiy

. wu insist on os continued, . even intensified, tatelligence

coverage of Cuba.
J, ‘In view of the policy factors, an iacreased use of

facilities,’ veal estate sad basing outeide the United States,
'° particularly in’ Latin Auerics, will be both necessary snd
desirable. ,

Adequate aerial reconnaissance of Cuba will continue.

iz. “OBJECTIVES:

‘Based on the above sssumptions, the following objectiven
appear to be proper for continuing CIA operations against

‘Cuba 3

4. Take all feasible clandestine action to isolate
and assist in isolating the Castro-communist regime in Cubn
from the rest of the Western Bemisphere and the rest of the
Free World. - ,

"Bo "To. the maximum extent possible, discredit the Castro-

communist. reg ine tn Cuba and in the Festern EHeuisphere and the

rest of the world.
=~4—


--- Page 12 ---
14-0000

c. Maintsin through clandestine means, short of comma uds
and guerrilla ‘type. operations, the maximum economic and
political pressures’ on the Cuben regiue and economy not only
_ for the purpose of hawpering the Cuban regime, but for the
. additional purpose of insuring the maximum ‘possible drain on
: ” Bles resources used . to support, Cubs. - /
pe Maintsin. maximum ‘possible ‘intelligence and counter-
. Inteliigence ‘coverage of Cubs, “including particular emphasis

; a 1. Capsbilities and intentions of the government.
reo ‘ Activities of the Cuban G-2 and its other
security: organs.
3. Soviet’ and Bloc activities in Cuba.
ae State of potential resistance, incliding the
os morale | and tenper of the ‘populace.
. ' &. " walatis and military order of battle end equip-
ment.
. 6. The loci of power and of possible stresses
end strains in the power centers in the Cuban goverumont.
- 7%. Belationships between Cubs, USSR, Red China,
the Bloc, Latin American nations and other Free Wor!d
‘end uncommitted nations.
8. The level of and the weaknesses in the Cubsn

, .economy.
we oo '

-5—



--- Page 13 ---
eta. il i

‘BR. Toko maximum ection to induce a split in the Cuben
regine. dad maintain the capability of capitalizing immediately
through clandestine means. to the extent possible on eny

| significent uprising, revolt, resistance, split in the regina,

or strains ‘gud stresses smong Cuban’ leadership or in Cuben/

., _ Bloc. relationships. cS.
; im, OPERATI Pian

_ Espionage and Intelligence Collection - All fersible .

‘effort ‘mould be undertaken to continue snd intensify intelli-

_ gence: collection concerning Cuba. The status of our latelli-

genes collection and related operational activity at the

’ present time and its development during the past six months

-is delineated . du detail in Attachment 4, which wes preprred tr

serve as the basis for. the ic's report on this particulsr

: matter ‘to the President's Board of Consultants on Foreign

_ Intelligence. “You will. note that this lengthy document

" presks down under nunerous ‘gub-beadings the intelligence
coverage which has been developed. by the Clandestine Service.
Set out below aro specifics of operational action it is
proposed to take to continue and, as possible, increase ine
telligence coverage of Cube.

1. fateliigence Exploitetion of Refugees: As you
know, with the quarantine and the cessntion of sir
braver t the heavy’ flow of Cuban refugees haa dwindled

o almost to nothing. In view of this and in connection


--- Page 14 ---
yes

with the contingency pilenning for supporting any persibis
mjiitary sotion in Cube, the Opa-Locks Interrogation - .

Canter as auch was disaantied, : although. the personnel

‘of. the Center have been retained intact. In order to
- re-astablish. the flow of intelligence from refugees,
it is. proposed that. Pon Auerican Airvays and KLY be
" taducea to. ‘velnatitute their: regular: flights from

Havana to Mims.’ This should be done as scon a3

" possible after the settlement of the current nogotinttons

and UN discussions. Coincident with this, _the Opa~Locka
vefugee’ interrogation center will be re-established

, with the sane personnel.

- Resident Agents in Cuba: Every effort will be

‘made to continue to exploit to the fullest, preserve the

viability of and, where necesssry, re-establish commmica-

' tieas: with the isi recruited agents now resident in Cube.
To an ‘extent, the speed and effectiveness of this effort
_ will of course depend upon the stringency of future

Cuban security snd control action, which it is impossible

as yet to accurately forecast.

3. Third Country Operations: The priority on re-

cruiting agents in third countries for dispatch to Cubs

will be reiterated gnd strengthened and every effort

. is will be made to jucrease. this coverage, both through

“the Asvelopnent of additional resident agents in ‘Cuba

oTe- ‘



--- Page 15 ---
14-0000

We: will, continue to _preas
gon services] wan are assisting us in the effort
- agninst Cuba: for additional coverage, including the
“ vecruiting of agents within. their own areas for joint
wry dtepateh, to Cada. . The [services Juost effectively co~
a . operating at ‘this point in this connection sre the
7 [Britian <Duten,. French; Spanish, Italian; Greek,
| . Norwegian, Daniah, West. German, Mexican, Argentinian,
Uruguayan, Canadian, Chilean, and. Teraeit,J Direct
os ‘approaches to several of these (services |oither by you
" personally or. in your name, as you prefer, sre
being separately recommended. Personal representation
| . by you to the[services|underlined sbove would be useful.
in addition, we will re-survey all other /1 fitetson services]
wo with which we are ins contact and reiterate to those
‘appearing ‘te. have any assets usable against Cuba our
éxtrene interest in maximum coverage of this problem.
Ina connection with the ftaison] probien generally, we wilt
' endeavor to induce. all of the fiitaison services] to make
greater use of their [aational] assets, both inside and
. outside of Cuba. Particular attention will be given to
. _ possible utilization of the [Vatican]
ses a — 5. ritine tions: In addition: to increasing

a ne oe

i ear efforts to get at se@sman agents end other aaritine
essets through [1 [Ftaiaca’ services| we will continue our

unileteral third country efforts to recruit seamen anc

te


--- Page 16 ---
14-0000

- Adan.

prrticularly Cuban seamen, to increane the tweaty

officers and. crew uexbers aboard aix Cubana vegsels we sre

"now running. as controlled agents.

- 6. Penetration of Cuban Installations Abropd: At
. the present tine we are running 12 Cuben diplomats
stationed outside Cube as controlled agents aod have viahle

7s operations ained’ ‘at. an additional 20 cuban diplomats.
, We propose to continue and intensify the current progren |

of attempting to recruit or defect every Cuben officin!
representative abroed to whom we can gain access and
concerning whom. we have eny reason to believe a

: susceptibility to approach exists. These additions}
penetrations will be attempted both through[uatlatere1]
operations and where appropriate in conjunction with

; B liaison services, |

%.- Audio Penetrations of Cuban Installations
Abroad: At the present tine we have audio and/or

: _ telephone tap coverage of Cuban officiel installations

in Chile, Italy, uexies! The Netherlands, England,

Uruguay, Greece, Spain, France, and Conaca | Ko

is jor expansion of this coverage is presently

: contemplated, but we will continue to survey additicust
targets of. opportunity and wherever possible tnsts11
coverage in those cases where the additional intelli-

: gence tron this type ‘of source over and above whist we
are now receiving would sppear ‘to make such Lastalirtien

+ worthwhile,

XX


--- Page 17 ---
14-0000

a Sommuntertions Intelligence: Ve will contin:
our present CIA Close Support coversge from the KOLA

ET eS ON A SO hm = Sn Na Re SR EN SIR A IN A rsh

station snfudeatJor the sane level end will continue
to Fress NSA‘ for sdditional coverage of Cuban comaunics~-
: tlons. 4s the current situation "uermelizes" it shewld
. be possible for NSA to reinstitute and perhaps even
aa ‘Anerease their, seaborne intercept coversge of: Cuban
7 comuuniestions. 2
zs Communist Party Operations: A complete survey
bes been made world-wide of all Communist Party
penetration operations and wherever any such penetration
Vea be directed egainst Cuba either by dispatching the
egent to. Cuba or by pointing the agent. against Cubrn
‘targets, "this will be done, except in those cases whers
such ection would result in unacceptabighrejudice tc
the operations in the area where the agent is now based.
” It is believed that the. most lucrative field for the
| redirection of such operations to the Cuban target will
‘be Latin America where there sre 65 penetrations of
various communist parties. Of this.65, the survey
we bave conducted indicstes that 23 have some direct
pertinent access to Cuban targets. All of these 22 31)
be directed against these targets unless in any cose
there, sxe: overriding reasons.to the contrary, The
remaining cases in the total of 65 are bein individusily
examined to see if they can be diverted to Cuban trrgets.



--- Page 18 ---
14-0000

SS ERE A PRD IES EL NEP NY OE ANT A AO A NES A rym

C

I1lega lly Infiltrated Agonts: The two

wleconcter black infiltrated teams (COBRA and AMTORRID)

| Which have produced substantial intelligence will be

continued, resupplied, end reinforced but pointed

‘prinartly at continued intelligence collection and nt
- the recrultuent’ tor intelligence collection purposes of
‘other Catans, who already are ‘legally resident in Cubs

in the sress where. the tenns are operating (Pliner el
Rio and Oriente). In addition, on the most carefui ly

selected basis, where it appears feasible, additional

. agents. and teams will be. infiltrated black into Cuba

in an effort ‘to duplicate the performance of the cosra

8nd AMTORRID teans and particularly to. recruit and, ca
_ possible, train additional agents legally resident in
Cuba.

“LL. Exfiltration: As feasible, sgents and potentist
recruits wow in Cuba will be exfiltrated for

_- tyaining, indoctrination, supplying with communications,

and motivation. They will then be re-infiltrated inte
Cube, primarily on intelligence missions. Where porsible,
this will be done through legal travel channels, but
where this is not possible, it will be done wherever

‘feasible through our black inf iltration~exfiltration
facilities, primarily our moritine assets.

«ll.



--- Page 19 ---
14-0000

.

toa

4

. bagt!
oe. apt
i

8B, Mueb of the above effort | as noted will be primarily

directed towards developing all possible evidences of stress ~
or strain within the regine and between the regime and other

: antions,’ particularly the Bloc. An intensive program wi}l
ba’ continued to. take. advantage, of any possible opportunity

. te weaken, _ subvert. . oF. Lit the. ine in any ible.
fashions) This tm basically” 8 Yong: tera effort. A great deal
ef work. already has. gone into this and the current

status of this program and the proposed further expldtation

of the numerous’ leads wo ‘have developed is being. made, in

the dtiterests 0 of brevity in this memorandum, the subject of
“a separate ‘compilation. The effectiveness of assets aimed rt
actually splitting the regine, i.e., # pairce revolt, will of
course. depend, | to an extent, on the willingness of the United
: States Governnent to support thes and it is entirely possible
. | that any: ‘such effort might fatl unless supported. with militery
forces which on ‘the basis of the assumptions in Paragraph I
above would appear ‘unlikely.
; c. Sabotage: On the basis of the sssuapticas set cut
above, commendo type sabotage, minor sabotage, and other
acts of sabotage inside Cuba would appear to serve littie
purpose end should not be undertaken except in the rare
instances where an opportunity is presented with acceptable
risk, to do najor danage to the Cuban econony. Tt is proposed
' to. contiiue searching for. such ‘limited opportunities, but.

BO active or wide scale program is contenpleted..

~12- .


--- Page 20 ---
. ; Dy ‘Farantlitary, _Coumando, and Guerrille Type Operations:

Given the Asguaptions in Paragraph I above, no wide scale
program of ‘such activity should be’ undertaken, However, we
: _ propese ‘to maintain in being our present facilities and
the capability of undertaking: such operations in order to
“ally exploit any: substantial change in internal Cuban con-
: ditions or ‘any substantial revolt or uprising which night occur,
B. Economie Warfare: 1t is proposed to continue end
"> intensify the program already undertaken to deny through

' clandestine sud covert means critical materials to the Cubrn
economy, This consists primarily of denizl operations, possibly
sone Preclusive buying and inducing friedly U.S. and allied
firns and governments to prévent the shipments of atrategic
aaterisla, to Cuba. -
jot Fe Counterintelligence: ‘The current t counterintelligence
. . and counterespionage progran agninst the Cuban G-2 snd
related services will be continued and ag possible intensified.
This ‘program hos developed Substantially and it should bs
posaibie within the. coming Months to increase its effectiveness
considerably in countering not only Cuban but Bloc tintelli-
* gence operations mounted against United States interests
from Cuba,
6. Political Action, Propaganda, Peychologice1 Warfare:

nod a this fiele the following tasks will be continued and where

—

‘appropriate intensified: — :
1. Assist and support State in any feasible actin.
; -13- ,

4



--- Page 21 ---
14-0000

to develop end exploit current oAs and Latin Americ:n
attitudes favorabie’to the containnent Pnud/or overthenw
of the _ Castro~communist regine, ;
2, Assist State in the development of post-Crntrn
". concepts, leaders, and political _B8oups,
; ~ 3,, Stimilate, support. and wuide covertly the
ve propagands and political section activities of the cn
ond. other Cuban political Groups rnd individuals, ra
. 'ppropriate, who offer a potential for impact inside
Cuba, _
Cote he Develop, maintain and exploit the will of the
Cuban people : to resist Castro-comunian, making aaximun
use. of the downgrading of Castro and his regime during ©
‘the missile crisis. '
Be. Discredit and ridicule Castro and his Yegine
“in Cuba, in the Heuiephere snd elsewhere, with emphosis
OR the theme the missile crigis denonstrsted con-
Clusively that Castro is nothing but a nere pawn of
Soviet imperialisa, ;
. 6 Continue "Radio Anericas" aod other CIA
Sponsored Cuban exile. radio brosdcasts :s 2ppropriate.
v Launch propeganda balloons after an operations}
capability has been satablished and policy authority is
"Granted to conduct propaganda balloon operations.
‘Continue the infiltration of Propaganda naterin1
dato cube via open mails, legal travellers and couriers,
‘with special omphagis on selective black cperations,

ai4-



--- Page 22 ---
*

| j a H, Exploitation o of Builo Grvups: We wilh continue

the clsidestine exploitation of. exile groups for tutelligence
as collecting, psychological warfare sud other approved missicns..

‘As fenathle, we will act to ount ss much of this effort 2x

possible from: areas outside the continental United States, ond
particularly frou Latin Anerica. i ‘Higher Authority decides
| . on a “Track Two" concept: or on. any, ‘similar concept which
| — ‘ contemplates ‘ heavy uncontrolled and only generslly directed

i

' sction. operations of Cuban groups against Cubs, it is believer
that efforts should be made to ‘transfer as much as possible
"of the’ esponsibility. for this non-clandestine, non-intelligencs
|“ type-¢ operation into the politics! field, which is the province
. (Of the Department of State. In this connection, ‘it is believed
‘it would be sdvisable to press for the creation within the
7 | Departuent of State of an office of Cuban Exile Affairs te
" handle the overt governnent relationships with 1 Cubsa exile
groups.
IV, ORGANIZATIONAL AND PROCEDURAL CHANGES:
Maximum implementation of the above plan which provides
for the moat intensive feasible collection of intelligenc:,
- the implementationof£ releted progrems as outlined, and the
maintenance of eapabilities to exploit targets of opportunity

Jas well as take advantage of any future substantial changes
4m dngernal Cuban conditions will, it is believed, permit
and make sdvisable the following:

' 1S



--- Page 23 ---
14-0000

ae ore

4A, & gradual but substantial reduction in the expenditures
and pergonnel of Task Force W. 7 Le
 B Consideration of the re-positioning of Task Force W
within the Clandestine Service, possibly ss 8 major conpenent

of. the wa Davision under different direction.

C,. The abolition of the operational Hongoose mechanism,
‘D. The removal of the past ‘frauework: which required

detailed consideration by the Special Group (Augmented) cf

even minor operstional deteils and decision by committee on

points which it. is: believed ore coupletoly within the purvier
of ‘the DCI and those officers to whom he delegates decision.
Ve ‘ESCORMENDED ACTION:

A. Your soncurrence in the above general operational plan

As recommended.

B, -It is recommended that you discuss this plan with ,

the Special. Group (Sugmented) and secure its comeurrence.

Cc. It is recommended that you secure from the Specint
Group (Augmented) policy approval to attempt to induce Yan
Anerican Airways and KLM to. resume their flights between Ainnl
ond. Hevana at the appropriate time,

bp. It is recommended that if eny “Track Two" conceyt
is proposed, you endesvor to tranafer to the Department «£
State all pessible overt aspects of this type of uncontrolled

-16-


--- Page 24 ---
14-0000

¥, ; it you soucur in. this concept,
wilt be nade

specific recomendat lon:

to you. concerning the  Fe-post tioning of Teak Force
Wtthin the Bo/P, Poe


