
--- Page 1 ---
104-10218-10038] | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992| -

. ° :
f a re,

exer

4 “~
. eet oe stbiti/a us

‘\. PROJECT OUTLINE —

CRYPTONYM —_ _ : FIELO CASE OFFICE

7 Oi Bi Gull he SSi0N
KO Fite PsSeaalliOl, “6S copy

Soult

USIDE OFA ATT, 1/6 Pes tae) DES S3

_ O48)

pO STATION __Mexico City “CHIEF OF STATIO
I. ; 7 :
: I
: ‘ i
| i - :
} a L
I.
| |
! |
1
|
| :
i
I ; _
fos ’ : 7
— { 7 4 .
; i.
i :
:
| !
. .
I. i:
| i
i
|
|
i

OL af 477. Ort ff ta


--- Page 2 ---
14-0000

“|, adentification °° wee |

“eminate. Given the general trend of recent Mexican regimes, as
* well as the. present one, toward more governmental regulation and

* tions used. by them as front instrumentalities for expounding
i
1

¢ a |
& kel ‘ : :

PROJECT OUTLINE

1

‘Mexico City, Mexico. ‘support for singleton ‘contract agent
operating into right-wing political milieu in Mexico for
intelligence purposes with some covert action by-product.

2. Objectives
a. Objective The objective of this project is to provide

support for a U.S. contract agent who has access to a wide variety
of right-wing political elements and organizations in Mexico.

b. Conduct of Project The contract agent, LIHUFF/1, was born
in Mexico and has had a long history of business experience in
Latin America, as well as, over the past fifteen years,, in Mexico.
At the present time, he is Executive Director of U.S. Chamber of
Commerce of Mexico City, which gives him a great deal of mobility !
in both American and Mexican business circles. Generally, it is :
from the Mexican business community that the financing and support
for right-wing political movements, organizations, and institutions

ne CE Nia

manipulation of the economic life of the country, the Mexican
businessmen continue to support right-wing political movements or
ostensibly nonprofit civic, research, and other types of organiza-

their philosophy and taking-action in the politico-cconomic fields.
LIHUFF/1 has natural access through his present position and past
extensive experience in the business community here. Over the
years, as a matter of fact, hs numerous associations with these
elements have earned him their trust and respect. In a vacauon AE 0
the past four years he has funded Lic. Agustin NAVARRO Vasquez UFFs
organization, consisting primarily of Instituto de Investigaciones |
a
!

emcees Slt that

no meme gene

Sociales y Economicos, A.C. (IISE), "Espejo" (a magazine on
politico-economic affairs), and Movimiento Universitario de
Renovadora Orientacion (MURO, a student organization). Also, he
has handled LICHANT/1 who has a history of, and numerous associa-.
tions in, the Mexican right-wing political arena. These and many
other contacts of this type will provide the basis for his reports
on this particular segment of the political spectrum in Mexico.

amet —

ec. Targets Right-wing political elements and organizations
in Mexico. ‘This would include not only Lic. NAVARRO, IISE, "Espejo,
and MURO, but Hugo SALINAS Price, Jorge. SIFGRIST Clamont and numerous
others of political significance on the Mexican scene. In connection
with LICHANT/1's present

SE Te = mee

re



--- Page 3 ---
14-0000

: position, it should be possible to obtain. information on

** education system which, according to the: last word received
‘from Headquarters, is somewha: of a priority requirement.

and f of the Related Mission Directive for Station Mexico

’. quite active and quite vocal and which have an influence in
“the form of individuals, organizations, and movements greatly

“the left-wing. Assumin g that, as indicated in the present

_ engaged in business in Panama}. He has been in a continuing. -,

poste

the Ministry of Education and other aspects of the Mexican

. d. RMD, This project is responsive to Priority A3d

City (approved October 1963). This priority reads in part:
“obtain Information on the stability of the Government ...
through high-level penetrations and through survei!llances and
controlled assets of other powerful political groups such as
the Frente Civico... and through continued development and
influencing of high-level government contacts." As an
ancillary measure, the project could contribute to MHSPAWN
objectives of the RMD under certain circumstances where use
of right-wing platforms ana urganizations is merited.

3. Background,
7 a, Developments Leading '.p to Project,

(1) Mexico, politically, is a country in which, _
increasingiy, a centrist political concensus is developing
based on the impact of education and economic development.
On elther side though of this growing central political
spectrum are extreme ‘left and extreme right wings which are

out of proportion to-their numbers. Political disturbances
and efforts to induce jack of stability eminate in the main
from these two extreme wings. As the centrist force grows
slowly, it is possible and probable. that these two wings will
intensify their efforts and become more and more radical.
The Station has intelligence coverage of the extreme left-
wing, but has neglected the equally.important extreme ‘right-
wing when, in the final analysis, any threat to Mexican
political stability by fomenting unrest and incidents does,
and will continue to, eminate from the right-wing as well as

be ener teen are Sy

RMD, the long range national policy objectives of the U.S.
toward Mexico are to encourage a stable democratic government
and political environment, then coverage of the right-wing

is required if for no other reason than meeting normal Station
responsibilities for political reporting. HBFINCH contacts
inthis area have been, and probably will continue to be,
virtually nil, ‘In fact, .at present in this area HBF INCH
contacts are non-existent.

(2) LIHUFF/1 was first picked up as a contact by
Station Mexico City in 1950' after having been a contract
agent for Station Panama City for some three years (while

Ae
a



--- Page 4 ---
14-0000
- . bh

: ; ern rn - :
relationship of one degree or another with. this Station
ever since then. This relationship developed from "contact"
_ into formal contract status in November 1962. LIHUFF/! has a
.f: > handled Station congtacts and activitics with LIHUFF /2 ' i:
rst as well as LICHANT/) from 1962 to date. In _
“.., addition, he has done a good deal of reporting on right-wing
activities from other sources and other contacts of his. i
Subsidy of the LIHUFF activity for MHSPAWN purposes ~ _ [
whteaeee Gg ; will be terminated effective
30 June 1965. Use of LICHANT/1! will be continued in an :
intelligence reporting capacity and,in a limited way, for | |
.

covert action efforts.

b. Prior Negotiations. There have been no prior
negotiations with the Mexican Government, intelligence or
security services, or ODYOKE elements on this project.
LIHUFF/1 has been used in the past, prior to his contract
with KUBARK, as a source by ODIBEX and ODMARK.

: :. : c. .Relationship to Other Projects. This project
H has no relationship to any other Station project. .

reales ahaa dae,

d. Utilization of Same Operational Assets,
_ CIHUFF/1 has not beenutilized:on any other project, past. or
present, except to the extent|he was involved with the LIHUFF

\ - activity Indicated-in subparagraph 3a(2) above.

4. Qperational Assets. -_
- a. Personnel. .

: (1) LIHUFF/1! (OA granted on 10 October 1962

soe with no number forwarded to field) -- Subject was born in

bow oe Mexico, is fluent in Spanish, and is about 49 years old.

! ee Since World War II, he has been in private business in Latin

| : America, first in Panama and then in Mexico from 1950 on.

Poo. : During World War II, he was in Army intelligence in China and,

therefore, had an understanding of covert operations prior to
his KUBARK experience. While in Panama, he was employed by
the Station there for several years " to organize a net
directed against a target of high priority interest", This
association was terminated by reason of his move to Mexico
for business reasons. Although he was in contact with this
Station virtually from his time of arrival in Mexico, he was
not picked up as a contract agent until November 1962. His
cover for his past and proposed activities has been natural:
that of a businessman with a conservative political outlook
and interested in the economic and political posture of- the

‘
i
'
|

:



--- Page 5 ---
14-0000

Mexican Government. Contact with him is covered by a socfat
oo relationship between his case officer and.himself; this is
ns easily maintained. given the large American community in Mexico
ot City. He hes had no formal intelligence training other than
rR GF ‘ that he received from the Army during World War II and on the
. job with KUBARK. Control of Subject is no problem inasmuch
: as he is an American citizen and has had considerable
oo oe = "™""" "experience with KUBARK by now. His motivation is that of an
: attraction to this type of work, being a U.S. citizen in a
foreign area, natural concern forhis business interests, and,
oe . . probably, the compensatory return from KUBARK. He is witting
of his KUBARK association and, aside from his World War tI
Intelligence experience with ODIBEX, in 1961 he had an
intelligence relationship with. ODIBEX which has long since
- 7. “.. been terminated, -

: (2) LICHANT/1. (OA granted on 22 April 1963,

: but no number forwarded to field) -- Subject is a ver

ae conservative Mexican educator and intellectual about ho years
of age. He has alternated between working in various L
capacities for the Government.of Mexico and in Mexican Ie
universities. At the present time, he is Private Secy. in Min.of !Ed.,
position which gives him unique access in the government to _
the general fields of education and politics as well as
considerable contact with other influential people in right«
wing circles.. He was recruited by LIHUFF/] in August 1962

on the pretext of doing research work and collecting infor-
mation for LIHUFF/1's general use for business purposes.
Subject has natural cover for obtaining: information on right-
wing activities from others due to his long association with
right-wing activities as a student, educator, and government
servant. Contact between Subject and LIHUFF/1 is maintained
under the guise of private business relationship, Subject has
had no intellicence training from KUBARK other than that
imparted by LIHUFF/1 in discussing his reports. There has
been no problems in control since essentially. Subject under-
stands that this is a business relationship with certain
requirements involved for it to be sustained. Subject's
motivation is that of an intellectual ly-convinced conservative
who has common objectives and outlook with LIHUFF/1 on
political and economic matters plus the financial aspect of
the LIHUFF/1 relationship. Subject is not witting of KUBARK
or ODYOKE interest in his activities and reporting. He has no
known contacts with other intelligence or security services,
past or present. -

WAL? Sateen

ee nee teone mentee

11 be no mechanisms involved
will continue to have access
IISE, "Espejo," and MURO for

b. Mechanisms, There wi
in this. project although LIHUFF/1
to Lic, NAVARRO, and, in turn, to

intelligence purposes.

ai,

Nath

L.
|
|
i
H
j
t
i



--- Page 6 ---
14-0000
. - . . : }

— ooo ty wee eee

boca t i
5. Security Evaluation, |

In the unlikely. event of compromise, LIHUFF/1 could
. continue to claim that he was not doing anything that hundreds
i Be of other businessmen, U.S. and Mexican, aren't doing as” _ :
. f+. 7 =": . Commonly-accepted practice: trying to influence the. politico-
j Lo bo economic climate. in Mexico for thelr own benefit. Whatever
_ a a the extent of the compromise, there would be no repercussion
t . . Insofar as other operations or activities per se were
Po ee concerned except that there might be some tightening of the
: . general operational climate for a while. If, somehow,
. ce LIHUFF/I's true role were disclosed, he could probably be
: vt backstopped with a minimum of publicity through high-level
.: /+ == §tation contacts with the Government (explaining the Statlon
i Interest In right-wing circles as attempting to follow what -
: : : they were up to In case they became a threat to the stabl lity
: of the present government).
: 6. Coordination. : a i
i ‘ : No coordination is desirable or required with other
bovine ODYOKE or PBPRIME elements, with the Mexican government, or
with other governments and.intelligence services... {tt Is
‘ ‘ assumed that normal coordination with varlous elements within.» --
. : KUBARK. Headquarters will take place. ;

7. Costs. |

a. General, It Is requested that this project be
authorized: in the. amount of $9,000 per annum effective —
Vleduly $965.0

b (1) LIHUFF/1 salary $3,600.00
(2) Operational Expenses . 3,000.00
(3) “Entertainment and Travel 2,400.00

Total per annum $9,000.00
_No non-KUBARK funds will be involved in this activity. |



--- Page 7 ---
14-00000

c. Forelan Currency. It Is antiél ated chat any “

‘forseeable foreign currency requirements will be within the
Station's capacity to handle.

Commitments. No commitments have. been made. to
LIHUFF/1 aoene than a salary of $300.00 per month with a
thirty day's notice on termination.

iiers iad

activity other than salary, normal standards of accountability | . a
wilt be used, | i 4
8. Annexes. . | 4

-@. Administrative Plan or Fiscal Annex, Not applicable. : 4

b. Communications, Not applicable. 4

. i { Bae

c. echnical Support, Not applicable. le 4

} ‘ fhe ta

d. Logistics, Not applicable. . . “TF 4

e. imi ci Nou. applicable. - :

9. Emergency. Conditions.

If an official anti-USA atmosphere of suffictent :

intensIty prevalled In Mexico, LIHUFF/1 very aie would Pe

not be able to maintain himself here, particularly if his i
employment continued in his present capacity. . This,
howaver, Is not seen as anything except a very remote contin-
gency due to the Government of Mexico's dependence on the U.S. -
tourist trade. In a general war, it is probable that LUHUFF/I | _
would be able to continue in place without too much difficulty | -
and would be wilting to continue operating on current objectives .
or to undertake entirely new operations against new targets. %
contact and communications should represent few problems In
Mexico.


