
--- Page 1 ---
14,0000

1992 |
ECORDS ACT OF
SSASSINATION RI

z ASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY A‘

104-10227-10153| | 2025 RELE/ |

23 Leprenbec 2982

MOOPARDGH Por, Deputy Dizes ter (Plena)

“SURECE  , Repere on Cuban Cperations
for verted. 1-15 sepcanber 62

i ____Thte to the second Summary repore of Stloiries in Cohan
Cperations, ang eovers the Peried lols S@ptenter 1982, Thy
report witl consist ©f a breakdown of Stah eperetions into the

. Prinstpal satezertas ag étivity,

As LI-€X Acttvity . ,

1. fina to Sosdauartars, There was a tated of twenty.

2. Agent setivition mg eve lopment s
8. There was a 8otal of @ighters avears Within Cuba at

. the besiming of the Foportin; perisd sad tuentye fou
bo by ths period’, Close, ; .

‘ , be Coment: oF the #over agente disparcned legally
, euring the Period, og ageat waa a roturose, ‘

CG. Four agents gare recrulted ang we agenes were ternie
nated turing the Perticd,

qd In ecopsration with the Ceran de2k, > here teitiated
88 operation ko dabrie? Suan SalLors wo Pe24 turough

iy



--- Page 2 ---
14-0000

\ Cubana vino wil act aa coordinatera for the operation,

a.
“ end has agreed to act az 6 courier for the intel see
‘in Ceba. The agent is currently on his way to Cuba -
via boat. oo -

é.

Lv

a.

4.

tho grea. Clearances have baen obtained fer: te

AVCELT-1, a Uruguayan diplesat, has. been recruited

ANOT©34, the princtpal agent/? operater, using signal
plen OOALIX, returned to Cuba via legal seans on 6
September snd was ace agaia tn radio comamication
with ue as ef li) September, fa fo in ecntact with

AMVEDNSL, the principal agent of what tenains of oor

intelligence cet {nm Cuba,

Control ef tha CGARIZ W/T conoxinication Link waa
pasted te WAVE from Neaduvartors effastiva 14¢ Sep=
touber . oo :

AUPALN©4 was dispatehed to Ceneva to attempt to ~ :
Fecrul¢ Maul CErURD Renilla, Minister of the Bational
Bank of Cuba, who ts preseutly attending ths sugar
conference in Switrerlend, |

doses LOPEZ Guerrata, Cobau sirlino pilot whe ia
disaffected with tire Castres regima, 1a in contact
with the Madrid station and has agreed to cooperate
and remain in place, .

Arrengeventes are beles made fer a enclnieal ‘surveil

lente of the charge office ia the Cuban Fabasez,
Montevideo,

B. Tropaganda activity

l. Kater Effares

Be

Sperstion Bolivar, Lesigned to place sixty student/
agents of tha Lirectorio kevolacionario Estudtaatil
(22S) extle group te asfversicics threugheur the
“cetorm Realsphere. Frezgress: Tiree in place and
twenty-ene ara precasaing,

j
i
}
i
i


--- Page 3 ---
14-0000

2.

b,

\!

Spexation Virgea del Cabeo, peaigned. to explelt the
B septeabec ermiversary of the Cuban patron ‘Saint as
& day of sourning expressing opposstion to Castro's
attacks upon the eburch, relisious freedos, and Coben
freados, Lrogrese: ALL lecal and testezn Yestenbere
ausets alerted for the sephewer campaign. tizty-
Rive ‘thousand pleses of Propagands were distributed
for. waitiag throuznoat Retin. America. The Cruzada
Foutalna Cebena (CFC) wasaa'a group sent eizae cables
and 100 letters. in the Latin american area. Throuch
tne joint efforts of the crc and Catholics, nese and

_ Benediction services wore held hofory 25,00 veople

a.

in tho Hiemd otedius, It was said to he a huge szeccsa,

After the resent Castro exocations, an emecty cazpaign
Waa inittated on tohalf of politisel and silitary
prisoners, Lrezreos: One. hundred and eight eablep
aod 226 letters wore sent. to Latia Averica by the Cabana
affiliate greups.. . . . oe

Bzesdoasta

Be

Tae gyenca uewapeper epensored twanty-four thirty

. Bidute progrecs over SHLE, Hisal, tarvated against

northern Ravens aad Matanzas provinces en general eotie
Castyo thomas. sven breadéasta ten end one half bours

‘datly over short and zedius wave,

d.

C2

4d.

Ke support a Cuban exile group preducing a waokly
thirty .aincte taps for dLstribation te a nuzber of :
Caxibbemn basin stations, and as weekly {1?reen xinute
tape for distriburica threugh LAA& channele to Central
and. South American stations, At Present core seventy
stations perticipete in thig eporation.

¥AVE has assumed eentect vole with local offices ef
Swan and radie broadcaster Luig CONTE Aguets through
eutoue, ;

Beginning UL septacbar, Lute CONTE Agnero began short

_ wave broadcasts of thirty winutes @aily on five fro

quenctea beamed to all Central aad iouth America and
Caribbean besin. :

ad Rad ilo, AAWuan ete mech

|



--- Page 4 ---
14-0000 ‘ .

be
a . 0. Marlting broadsasts wore cancalled for pariod for
; an vessel ealatenencs,. An électronte engiscer tag been
ae wt hirad end Gonstruction of TV intrusion ‘equipecut has
me 7 begun. This equipsent will be wid on the narl tine .
. - broadcast and-be-targeted agatast: the Uavena area.
£, “Cuban Freedom Commtttoe funded ond directed tivo’
j cae " Rours. daily. ovar WGBS, Mieal, and otx. hours daily
| me _. ower MIF, Zey fost. — ce :
To “3s Leaflote/Famphlets, Produatten end distribution theeugh=
| 7 ' OBC the testern Newlephore by sources: oo
| a. Cuban oxtle groper os
2) DRE © 10,060
2) cP = 15,009
3) FORD © 26,000 |
%. WAVE printed 4,000 Grandes Mentizes (Big Lies) ao Stree
of a verias, . ; , :
4. yoriodtoats :
Qe Ayano, weekly newspaper: ve editions, 40,360 Py
circulation, . : os So .

oo >. Inforsatioa asvuletter, weekly: Two editions, 4,540
i ' ¢lreulatlon, . ; .

®, BAL Trinchora: Quo edition, 2,500 im etreulation, |
4. APJ Bulletin: Tso editions, 16,000 WH etreulation. |
©. THR Bulletin: One edition, 5,000 WH circulation.
&. FOR Bulletin: Gus edizton, 5,000 WH circulation.

& §1 Mundo, voskly newspaper; 3,000 per weak in Poninie
_ con Republic, :

LE et echt ose BS US wat cienae cea cere aware

i]

bh



--- Page 5 ---
14-0000

ZAG SAE ied |

,
THEME Koi DERE 1 Une 1k Cres : pot
wet
Revert 0 cout Sy banar ions tats ryt * ;

Be vgaeeT!
"bh, Babesia Libra, weelly nagszina of over 176, eco. NH

3.

6.

elrculation..
\

Jours and Trevol - cuben 6 { Group Represantation

&. DRE. To teurs covering Brasil, truguey, Argentina,
end Chile,

“& CFC. Tso rours covertes chile, . Bolivia,. Argentina,

Fera, Ecuador, Colowkia ‘and Fanana,
e. Kerigus MUERTA, To |nt0 podizal congreas,

ec. Arrangenents are in ‘process to send a owall variety
” @rovpe to hanico for propaganda valas, The perfer=
cance 9211 be filved oa 15 mm for oebaoquent general
aoe througeour Latin: Anerica. . .

@. Artangosrats were nade wtih the State Popartuent by
Wh/S/secucicy fer the facilitactos of re-entry fate
the Ualeed states of long-term Ceban assety dispatchsd
aa Propaganda. teurs of Ceztral gad South Amer ies.

Cther Activition, Headquartere representative war with,

Ro}3a Santamariza, and discussed his plan for PRAUTS
_ projest, i.c., eatabliszent of phantom colls insida

Ceaba through medics of propaganda chair. letters. Yaad
quarters 19 studying thse ides with a view to posatble

trialeren on a sna]! -esale.

political Action setivity

i.

C2. A seaticg was held 9 septenbar with br. Miro Cardona
at waich tice be was advised by higher authority that our
Governasnt regards the C20 ao the control poize of contact
jn its deallag with the Cuban exile and uncersgromd
activity. A basic edviaterrative bedzet will bo allocated,
@oé it will be is the neighborbsed of a aillion éotlars
por year, All other allovattons of money will be cn tha
basis of speesfic projects aulraitted by the Counci! and
approved by tne Wmtted States, Tha Cuban Council wlll
continue te broaden its besa allowing entry of all sud-
stantial exile groups not idencified with Batista or with



--- Page 6 ---
14-0000

@6«

Comminiom, Groupe wot willing co serk with the Couacti
will bea dealt with bilstrerally (the unlted States end
the group. trewlyed), but iv, Mire will te keoe tinferced
of these activities, Such iaformation will be kept in:
eho strictest secrecy by Er. Miro and his specially
appointed asaistant. 1f this arrangenent should prove
ingscure, euch contacts will tersinare, All provlens  .
arisins free Council activities wtll. te @iscussed bowscen

the CRO snd the Bureau of ARA of Stats Department. Br.

|. Miro will maintain his: contact with the Ybite House for

2.

1.

‘Cases Wherein ba consigexs euch centact to be urgently
necassary, err ae

“agélelenal Political pevelupnerta, Aftar Algh lewol

United states comatderstisa and desisies, Dr. Miro was

Anforeéd, ats meeting on 16 Septentior, that the zrespen-

ainility for the organtcation end plaws fer exile Cuban’
jurists and Lawyers would be hia, In addition, to hia
future funding “salaries” of the existing ALASAU organia
sation, $5,060 per aonth would be provided iv. Miro or :
hig désionee retreastiva cro.1 sugust to support fr. Hiré's
fastion ef lasyers. to whom he bas a leng utscding :
comitaent. It was saplusieed that thia transfer of .
Kesponsthility must he accosplished hannmiously, without
adveras press resetion, or support of this terk would be
withdraw. Col. Veedeli Joimson was hired aod will bs
pinced in contact with ir. Miro prior to 1 Cerober., Pe
will fumerion asthe day-tceday comtace hetwsen Dr. Hiroe
ang this Ageacy and the (mited States Cowernuent. If waa
mada elesr to fr. Hire that ig desend tor responstbilicy
ag exclusive sharmol to tne other profasstonal groups,
{.6., Stadante and Isher, was retected. He was told that
any propesals he sight wish te 2ake in the stedenc ang
labor fields woultt ka welcoxed as pranoting harmony and
eventuak unliv of Cubsu exile antt-Castro dlasenta,

D. Paranilthayy scetvizy

Merifiice Actinity —

a. Aight vessels, four Agensy sumed and four Coban omed,
are available to support this activity, Sé the eight

vessels, five were operational and threa were midorzoing


--- Page 7 ---
14-0000

2.

&. Appreval waa granted far tha

a as

tepairs during tho period. The principal activity
during the pariod revolved around preparation and
aupport of operation TEAgAl, to be imnlenented 16
Septonber. ; :

b.. The Ler, RARSARS-J, £2 now awaiting addtttonsal
| @ogthesrtng acd electrical work at the jan dden.-
| Drydock Company. Paley has bean eatsed by: the-lack
of priority and tho laduction of saveral ‘Ravy ships
requiring. argent. répairs,- nee oe

e. Captain TIRADD has spotted » comp Late evou far ‘the
BARGARS J and eraw nases and blogrsphie dare have - -
‘bean aubaitted to Readquartere far élesvance,

d. Tie Cover and Commercial scare fe engaged. in pres -
vidieg fer the ships resistration, nane change, and
SOVex mechanles te sllow for fatura funding and

_@peration, = :

éaent Agtivities aod bevalopments

8. ‘There waa a total of forty-tws 1% assats iovolved tn

activities daring the period, loside Cube there wera
- 6H agents, a@ principal egent eud @ radio cporator.

ixternaity, there were forty agent assoza composed of

thirty-five PM types snd five radio epersters.

; passage ef R596 radio
SSax conplete with atgual plan, pada and crystals
dante Cuba via AMELESS~3 ‘channals Which atilise a
foreign diplomatic courier,

&.° Approval waa granted for the conduct. of operation
SVIkt, an ecfiltrattea eparation to be tzplesentes 21
Septeabar, a

a Ca 9 Septexber seven ANAAZE agents wera terminated 7
leaving a total ef thirty tn the group.

&. The internal ra/wt eparater ERRIQUE asing signal plan

BOTLOX reporte thet Ris gceep bas been eperating a
elendestine radio brondeast olece 12 Septaxber (8adto



--- Page 8 ---
74-0000

Bs bly ‘ \

SEERET en

28.)
‘Libértad) on 40 wetor beed Zrom LIGO to 1313 local |
.tira on Tussdays, Thuredsys and Saturdays. de are
attempting to varify this elate, aid am emeunceront .
will be aade over Yolca of Amarica as te the. exintence
of the broadcasta.. a .

i nga trained by elese of partad 1S septater
‘. @e Total pouber ef agenta szaineds as
& Toral oudar of agents in trating: 26 1 .
2. FIG Be
a. Agents crated ia s¥s 2
b. Agsnte eraieod tn tragecrafe: 4-

“3. Packnop —

as Agects trained fo. agit /prop: 4

b, Agents in training tn agit/prop: -9 (includes two
J4/% vadops.)

| @. agente ready for training: 12

“bs Raxentiteary

“Re,

a Agents in training: iz

db. Type of training: Small boat handling, reception,
yeeoanalesenca techaigques, .

i. Meszeces. WE: 13 total - 12 ceaetvad, 3 sent by AVE.



--- Page 9 ---
b

HAVE. Winetesa ateff agests wore proceuead at
Koedqueartero ané dispatchsd PCS to VAVS bringing
the total of FC3 personnal to 23 at the eloso of.
the parted, Tha rensvatica of ney offices at HAVE
te cexplote. et io

EEN. New haa respmethilty for reisying all.

tratfle to aad frea WAYS and crypto relay rosponaie
biliey fer all BARR traffic. The office of Commumis
Sations has reestved theiz apyroved P/O for REM and

- Reve comeadiced pirssenel actions on aporoxinately
, Sifty porsennel assigned at thio installation,

The cransfar of MOTO ty the Offten of testettag

3) Be. Glee Loney, UH/4/Legtstiaa, {9 now at InFic

a.

for the purpece ef adjusting tha Lzvsatory
pending erraigeseats to be sada 60 transfer oll
Wit catestel held by SPIO te Sepply Bivisioa,
‘Offhes of Logistics,

2) The Plenatng staff, Office of Logiatics, has
| acted as coordinator in asttera portatoing ta
personnel, finanes, cever and eerurity, the
aajerity of which Reve been or wlll be astrled .
eshertly. - .

3) Fresent plans contemplate the release af INYTG
_ te the Office of Logistics an 2 Cexsoder 1981,

All sateriel ot JNTIDE has bees inveaterted end pre
pared for shigzent. Althoagh the iarendad earring,
tha ship JOAR, arvived at EATIBS on U3 September,
loading was delayed due co the praseses of foreiga
shipping in tha area, If 13 anticipated thae loading
will comsence on or abort 18 September and will be

esupleted within four days,



--- Page 10 ---
400000
. .

@ JREATI. A draft of a lease egremsont for the JMBAQR
progerty has been prepared und forwarded to ths omer LC

of the real estate for final approval. . a

:

Ensvera hava been received fren various sourees res
garding our queries for new Cuban pesos, Two sources.
are in Wise aatlare, PTDCMring poses in the gooent of . :
$10,060 U.. dollaxa,

b. The funding for SMNYSE is in process, Mr. Befi,
i oo : ‘We/6/Pinance, 12 at UAVS toe establish a eomarctal
a / . set of rccerda for maintenmneca by the field offico,

ft

i _ @y-- Total PY 1962 ebligations through 13 soptender for
| oO. Coban operations are 94,675,993.60, Of this total, -

: $1,674,775.00 represents payacata for the mainigeance i
{ : of tho CRE and payzants for dependents of tho atrike 4
| . ferea ‘ireugh Septenber. .

These is a. epecial intelligence eanes | t0 this report, "Counters

‘vevelotignary Activities {n Cuba," for the peried 1-15 soptesber,
isoued separataly, | ; :

Co Bo J.C. RIBS
fo ot . : Chief,
: ot Western Renisphore Bivisioa

| poe An/6 Plana. Dinamo (27 September 1961)

! Distribution:

: @rig., G1l- Addresnea

: Le C/ors:

i 1 = AfovP/a

L- cAan

1 = w/cors - i
Le c/un/4 . ' : |
2 » 88/4/Plans

