
--- Page 1 ---
y

CH wr J . _ ue ~ SDR Creo’

‘(toa 10145. 10436) ° ‘| 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION ae ACT OF 188
K (Qn INTORNAL = ADMINISTRATIV™ USt ONLY

© 16 November 1978

MeMO FOR FILGZ ss be oe

~ feo, few TAL

SUBJTCT : _Pennent. Bagley ee
Ts Yesterday at about noon Mr. Bagley's attorney phoned.
OGC asking for the followings 7 _ _ ,

} as The origins] copy of a memo said to be in Baglay's

handwriting, concerning options for Nosenko! di osals

This. was ‘in the ‘Wart testimony at line 4218. ‘and. th ‘Helns:

testimony at lina 461 On

o.Be The original ang excised portion of a Bagkey’ immo

oe ‘cotanonys

<— “The original letter ‘from Bagley Ye tdevastating consen

Ler, a

a ‘quences Nin. _the. Hart.t stimony ablline 387%

THREES iv esr oven hee 18 aT RANA Rein atokcemeremneete ng a nena megane

a ae “Bagi ae cobplete" Personnel file *tiekwting Specificeliys

“the. 0 1966/61 ‘periods

Sh aie Don eth earn

(2) Fitness Reports ané coments for the 196272 period.
(3) Promotion Tecommendations for 1962-72 puriod.
os (4) His IM and the associated citation.’

2s We asked the various parties to gather the items requested

je

_to See what was involved. The OPF was at Headquarters, having been

SEN Crscceet erates nreniiny aemeniine ste

bgought from WIC for the HSCA inquiry, The Honor and Merits Awards

ener at

Board had the moial and citation (having been brought

raciow). CI Steff had thr doewments cit-d in sks fart tesinony. ie

met yesterday afternoon to consider what is involved’. Bagley wanted
the naterial an appearance at HSCA this morning. fn Be 4 22.
_ADMINISTRATCV - INTORUAL USR ONLY

Landcnre mane iomternn: 4) aces


--- Page 2 ---
14-00000

a + *

i” ~ ps
i” ©, ADMINISTRATIVE = INTRUAL. US” LY
}

woe

ws

3. ccs has a standing position. on non-rglease of citations
“24,22 7
and avards to persons retired unter cpver ((Bagley is retired in

Belg: ium und er State caver} 50 he would have to make a decision on

that before he could have “ine material, He could not be Given some _

or his personnel records, as they are clsssified, although he could be
shown ‘then as in a Privacy Act requests he is not now cleared for
acesss_to classified material, although his attorn-y iss. cs ‘Stat
considers the materials _not cited in_the Hart testimony as ‘celassified;
those portions authorized for uSe are unclassified only to the extent
used by Hart; the exception is’ the entire handvritten list of options, :
which has deen provided the Committ. at its roquest, and he can See that

When ha appears before the Coma time's

ke I tried to contact: the DDA and DDO, reaching John chon,

He _B8Teas with this preLininary | posi tion, Mike Mall ‘fglanik ‘phoned me. badk, today,

indicating that when the cover aspect is straightened out Bagley should,
be treated as anyone else. Dick Rininger of OGC, maanwhile, had advised
Mr. Chabot, Bagley's attorney, that the cover cofisideration has to be
resolved first. Bagley was there and Rininger also spoke to hin, with

Bagley indicating his intantion to have his cover removed,

~ a

SDBreckinricge

ADMENISTRATIVE ~ INT RNAL USm ONLY

1 An PEIN A EDEN AILS MSA es an AlN ew nat REE AEA EA Ao UE RD rtm cna iON az men et omaeen arene mtn ae once tien ek ai nc anntennineananbitenaatens amine ns +
, :

aT

