
--- Page 1 ---
14-p0000
104-10265-10118) | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |

2 a —- oo a "90 Geteter 1989

MAMORANDUM FOR THE RuGURD

SUBULOR) Hi shiightoa of Tape-Recorded Conversation in ocd Betwoen
Rr, William UD, Paowley and an Unidentified Cuban duriag
Poriod 17-18 Cotober

A. On 9% October the underaignod and Caen Faust of VH/3
liatened to the play-back of 3 tense, brought to Vashingten trom Bard
; and given te Colonel Ning by Mr, Pawleys on 19 October, which wae a
: recording of Mr. Pawley's conversations with two Gubang during the
: pertlod 27018 October, The flrat convergstion was with on unidentified
Guban, believed to bo 9 meuer of a group of wealthy anti-CASTHO Cubsna,
menbore of whioh have talked to Mr. Pawlay recently ebout their
! plang rer sabotava of the coming gucar harvest as reported in UMIA+32
| dated 2 October. The second Cuban waa sHPACA-], a Cuban journalist
2 of opsrational intoreat to Btation Habana, and & separate memorandum
: ip submitted on that conversation. .

. 2. Tho unidentified Cuban, who had somewhat of an accent and
opoke indiatinetlv, woe difficult to undorstend. Ho mentioned a
mosting "with somo of our people who came up fron Cuba" to disouse
plans, Ue eaid hie group had bean contacted by 8 representative of
General Jono Bleutorio PRDRAZA, leadar of Cuban revolutionary groups - 7
in tho Domintoan Hepublic, who wonted te know what action their group) =”
bod taken and was told that they had © plan “to atart-gabotese", Tho moat
Cuban said the PEDRACA ropreventative eaid thatr group (tha PEDRAZA
group) had four provinoes organised in Cuba, mentioning Comayuey and:
Santa Clara, and that they hed twu provinces yet to be organi ved a=

Ysabana and Matondas.

i - 3. The-Cuban eaid his group noeded twe things -< more] backing
i and noneys he pointed out that Cubans in Guba are afraid to start an
: ~ underground movement, and there wag no way to raise funds, ote. Myre
i Pawley gave him no encouragement on the woncy angle, saying that even

if thero were Amerscana willing to rug the risk of. becoming involved
in Cuban revolutionary sotivitica by furnialing money for sich 8 ©
povement, which he doubted, he felt that at the prosent time 1t would |
be like “putting aoney dam a rat-hole" for the following reasonas - ,
: QQ.) there is no unity among the anti-CASTRO groups, and there are at . .

: least 10 that he knows of who are working absolutely independently of

:  @ne another; end (2) CASTRO ie.in control of the country and hes the

. gupport of @ lerre. numer of Cubana, especially the under-=privileged.

! Mr. Powley said he felt the Cuban economic situation vas worgening

fast and that if it gets bad enough, a large nusber of Cubang will

turn on CASTRO; but until that time cores it would be danzercus to

try to organise o revolutionary ovement.

SECRET



--- Page 2 ---
14-0000

ete

er setbpaneis teabate era menses ns ee

SECRET

ode

‘he He. Padvoy caked the Cubsn if hia group fele they had moral
auppert of the U. 3. ond tha Cuben replted that thoy uonted-U, 8,
moral support but whether they had it or not, they felt they. were
obliged to garry through with their plong. Fr, Pewley aaid ba’ atdnte
know whet to tell him <-« would hove to think @buut it and gee tf nnye
thing could be dons. Ho said, "having been conmctud with the U. 8.
Oose nt, I ean't ges invelysd in revolutionary #ovenonte”. leo
geid he would hate to vee tho. Lowiiniain Government got involved,
wiich might he dhffieult to avoid with so many Cuban oxiles there,
wut cemeented that ho wyisretood "the Doniniean Oovernment hasn! t

_ Biven thes a dime’.

Harths Tharpe
WH/TIT/CARTB

SECRET


