
--- Page 1 ---
14-0000.

104-10174-10037|

.
wr.

a

‘

¢[nd

| 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992

“ a4

coke
L Fevruary 1960 RET NT CIA
Do ground Use On}
MEWR LED ARTE RCD ot Reproduc,

SUBJLOTs Meeting with@eary P. Lopez at te Statler-Hilton Hotel on
1 February 1960 from 1000 hours to 1539 hours.

oF”
1. Those present were ..rs. Vidal FP/PA, @exander Hunter)(villiams)
PP/EAD, Charles Penney (Twiss) MI/Pay and Ehilip Toomeyy (ThompSon) «H/,/PP.

o7 oF 5
2. Er. (opes)ave a rerort of his%€ontucts in Cuba after receiving
hig. notes which yere brousht up b° Mr. (ioel and given to Hr. (Lopez
3 Coomez xwoGored sata that he hed given biosraghical sketches of
Echevarria, Rasco, Laureano iatista, Martinez raga, ben de Leon and
Sanchez Arenyo to the Station reeresentative. he had also tumed over a
report of Martinoz Fraga on the sims of the Re ncion de la iievolicion.s

oF
3. Ur. (lopez) rerort was taped end a transerirt will be forwarded
to UH by P?/PA. 5
cS)

Kh. Specific recommendations made ty ir. Gozex kineludea having
Herbert Matthews iso to fis a and try to in*luence Castro. iattheus
has a good reputation throuchout the 25th of July Movement and could
holp in an approach to Castro. A visit br Ei currow to do a broadcast
on Cuba was also recomended. uP (Lopez) feel that Castro will be in
power for a long time to co.e and that we shoul try to influence hi
He is seriously 2ffected hy any defections and these wicht be enccur:
em Castro can be hit by defections of overworked and countemnanded officials.
Two men who were mentioned as ripe for defection are Rufo in Hacienda
and Gepero in Comercio. 2Blcrez piso recamenied contact with Padre
Alverto de Castro in Caracas. [his padre was forrerly Videl's instructor
When Fidel was in Caracas he was scolded by Fadre Castro whom Yidel
treated with great respect acuardin: to Josco. The Paare and Fide! svent
about one and one half hours alone together at this tine. This priest.
should be checked as a rossible influence on Fidel. ‘he possibility of
a split between Fidel and Raul should be exploited. Reul is cold ard
mean and tho fact that he is fidel's bruther dces not carr’ too mich

weight.

/~

