
--- Page 1 ---
14,0000

104-10172-
‘ 1172-10112 | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 J

a

Maggie .

aA

ah

4

Niaz

RATERUAL BEVUESED AT crs HEAD WARTERS ny

Her comeeeyey En On ASSASSERAT EONS STAFE HEUIRERS

HOUSE

“

FILE TUTTE /SUNBER/VOLEETES TA: fi "EDEL: = RCE sevety)-

yy

INCLUSIVE DATES: f
. CUSTODIAL WNHET/LecAT TON : oe

- DELETIONS, F ANY: =

WATE) , TAI FEVINE

PECHIVER IR RETURNED . PRINT NAM)

MAY BE


--- Page 2 ---
14-0000

THIRD AGENCY DOCUMENTS - 201-128561 (HALPERIN)

Vol. VII FBI (Boston) 2/6/62; File 100-25501 & 65-14303
FBI (Beston) 1/25/63; .Files. as above
FBI- (Washington) 2/26/63; re’ HALPERIN
: FBI (Washington) "2/26/63 : . .
_ FBI (Boston) 1/13/64; File #BS 100-25501 & 65- 14303 _

FBI (Washington): 1/18/65 ; .

FBI (Boston) 3/25/66; File “#100- 31726 & 100-424134
“re ‘Edity Evelyn HALPERIN

FBI (Washington) 6/14/66; File # (S) 65-14303
FBI (Boston) 12/15/66
: FBI (Washington) 10/10/67
ae “FBI (Washington) 4/30/68
. FBI (Boston) 7/14/72 re Maurice :
“FBI (Boston) 7/14/72 re Edith



--- Page 3 ---
1400000
_ — _
/ -.
te
a, ew
eitisen anda former OSS axlcyoe.: .
: closely associated with Martie Did and

” end bo handled cows of toe | iE -

affairs. Ao of April 1959, Sud) believed [ ;

. : yet SB :

eR/cR/B dossier (Also cea LCMAFOUL Caro files.) LB

eR PTTay iy Kirerted Soty fetta petmen aticcasiese fyed. !

fon a Christeas carnt(1¥s*, an Apt Gat, HUTT ne why i

\ 4 prtrenar, Serene, Caba; first tine tink Sunt-ct’ hes civ'n + i

: | ey ndir.es on acersstine cards © : f

Pr

i

i
Po , 1
io :

20)-129 S56]



--- Page 4 ---
14-0000

(tae OUTGOING MESSAGE, #@> =r
we (eee Gee oot

6 ee BION AL CENTER USE ONLY
aon co ace oy we wro eo rer: eer)

onto c o o 4a u \ 0 »
SECRET / os
wrneact maou morcaron Bate nes anour om Perret pst
STAFF 1321302 DIRECTOR b 883288 :
cont: qos 3. / wero: “re DdOL pdofde ose efes Den OISSEM BY: 75 .
ae / cfeye3 ; O mnento “PER of
7 : : . 4 .
. a : FOCAL VY: Denn @ 2&0)
a : TOA LS DON INFO OTTAUA+¥Y FVES ONLY ° mo Oo

RYBAT PLNHBLANKET Yo : os : |
: REF! LONDON uz09_ TIN 9722971 {RELAYED OTTAUAPY . mo
be PER REFERENCE REQUEST FOR TRACES ON MAURICE HYMAN’ , |
LP ERIN {20)-2285b1}5 WE ARE FORUARDING VIA TH-FIVE 3966"

S AND A RECENT ARTICLE FROM THE SIMON FRASSER- UNI- © .

HA
NEUSPAPER CLIPPING
VERSITY. BRITISH COLUMBIA, ALUTN
THIS INFORMATION IS PROVIDED PURSUANT To OUR SERVICE TO SERVICE *

ARRANGEMENT FOR THE EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION ON PERSONS OF COUNTER- ° - i

r MAGAZINE FOR PASSAGE TO JAGUAR «

“INTELLIGENCE INTEREST-¥ co Te Lo - 7
2+ ., MAURICE HALPERIN “WAS TUO CHILDREN? DAVID CARLOS: BORN smay

. : I
: 193? JIN OKLAHOMA cETY AND JUDITH YVONNE BORN 3% SEPT 2A32 IN BOSTON. : !
i

“MAR 149bb}. LNERGO APPROVES PASSING TO . A

{SOURCE: DBD- 43244

JAGUAR. AGENCY RECORDS ON MORTON HALPERIN Do nOoT ‘REFLECT ANY RELA~

TIONSHIP uITH MAURICE HALPERIN: HALPERIN Ts A COnMON. NANE. ¥.

“3+ PUBLICATIONS SINCE 2957: "GROTH AND CRISIS IN THE LATIN

" PCONFERENCIAS SOBRE GEOGRAFIA ECONOMICA”

‘
:

AMERICAN ECONOMY: 24bhs
mHACTA UN NUEVO SISTEMA DE “PLANIFICACTON Y (DERECCION .

ibaa
DATE: : . wf oe ot .
ones oo Se Je P&L DISSEM
. os RYBAT

EXT: . -
. : a : RECORD COPY :

axreenes tens OP NCAS



--- Page 5 ---
14-0000

; OUTGOING. MESSAGE hop a:
Lo rr —|

BRIN CONTENU SE OF anh onneeee ~———
ace us ae we “ace oe paoae

a a ee 2 2
“secret . a,

we nenae Manone ERATOR “ pate-naegeove en. * quvenes warentace mvneee

STAFF . _. DIRECTOR

wean DISSEM BY:
mo wee
sarueto PER

CONF: . (NFO: FILE . S33 2&8

oaqg

ECONOMICAS EN LA UNION SOVIETICAT 29b4. AND "THE ease AD DECLINE oF
“FIDEL CASTRO - AN ESSAY IN CONTEMPORARY RISTORY*s UNIVERSITY OF
“CALIFORNIA PRESS. yo . , .
- W. THE: ‘FOLLOWING. Is FROM ‘FHABOVE AND NEEDS. “THEIR CONCURRENCE TO
PASS -T0 JAGUAR. “MAURICE HALPERIN: Is CURRENTLY TEACHING AT SIMON
FRASER UNIVERSITY IN BRITISH COLUMBIA AND EXPECTS THAT THE UNIVERSITY
“UILL EXTEND HIS TEACHING APPOINTMENT To AUGUST 2977. HALPERIN TOLD
FHABOVE THAT HE AND HIS EIFE TOURED, ISRAEL. ITALY. GREECE. SPAIN AND
ENGLAND IN THE. SUMMER OF A975. HE IS CURRENTLY WORKING ON THE SECOND
VOLUME OF HIS BCOK ON CUBA. HE LEFT THE IMPRESSION UITH FHABOVE THAT

WHEN IT IS FINISHED HE BILL BEGIN UORK ON HIS AUTOBIOGRAPHY. {SOURCE?

t
i
i

'

i

OCOA=19102. a2 JAN IY
5. “FOR OTTAMA: JAGUAR HAS REQUESTED TRACES ON MAURICE HALPERIN.

. PLS NOTIFY LONDON IF FHABOVE APPROVES PASSING INFO FROM PARA FOUR

ABOVE TO JAGUAR-¥ Se
he PILE? PB-br4b/3. EZ INPDET od oe we

mo DDO/AGE - - Ae Es GOLDIN {IN DRAFT?

pare: 12 JU y -EUR/BC v7), os 7

onic: PATSY MOLE. pees a

units CI/OGy fl E[etle- ; se

ext: | LLL? Vo. . EEG - . \
Mn. on a — PAA

coomomaree onvesea
Gussmmeanon | REPRODUCTIved BY OTHER THAN THE isSuINS: OFMCEISPRU..JITED «= E2 IMPDET



--- Page 6 ---
14-0000

Ex-OSS Official Works

For Reds in Moscow

By VICTOR LASKY
Merh american Ne Aree ALARTe
A former Bosten University
professor, wha once was a Dish
oficial In the OSS has turned ©
up !9 Moscow working for the
iSaviet government, :
_{ The professor, Dr. Maurice
'H. Haiperin, Med thia country
seven years ago ater ln-
quiry- Into his Communist Dack~
ground, .
According to the State De-=
ipartment, he probably ts ad-
visinz Soviet officials on Latin
American affairs, an area in
nich he js expert- .
Prof. Halperin was suspended
by Boston. University in 1953
after he refused, en constitus
- Uonal grounds, to tell a Senate
Subcommittee whether he had
ever been a Communist Party
. member, .
According to the State hee
Partment, he had previously, .
been Involved In Soviet espi 2 1Dr. Halperin.
page ie earume Washington. |rontained In nis asses, that
e¢ has ents Name: ye + 7 ad been
loeth Tersit Bentley, adm ted the State Department h
iformer spy courier, as one of;
Iher sources of supply among!
‘Government oMicials. '
1 intrigue in Mexico t . .
: And since 1983, Dr. Halperin, From 1931 to 1041, Dz. Hal-|
‘thas been involved in stil moreiperin~a Harvard University
Intrigue’as an “exile” in Mexi-;graduate—had been & professor).

co. It was he, for example,,at the University of Oxlanoma. j
who assisted the record, it was;:

two | Suspected iAccerding to
spies fn thelr flight from -Mex-!in this perlud that he directed!;
feo to Czechoslovakia to avoid!

Communist activities in Okla-"
United States extradition: pro-shoma and, on repeated visits
(on Sh .

MAURICE 1. HALPER
sea

ume. .
_Fired.in Oklahoma

jto Mexico, conferred with Nexs
uly. 25, 1960, Dr. Hal-/ican Red leaders, OA one visi!
peria and his wife, Edith, ap. {to Cuba in 1933, he and other
peared at the United -States,leftwingers had ‘been arrested
: Embassy in Moscow to present'by Cuban authorities and ex-
ty their United States passports Pelled from the country. -
i -- for renewal. vo { In 1941, much of this was
AH this was disclosed in a, disclosed in. an investigation
State Department memoran-;conducted by an Oxtnhoma
dum prepated for Senator!State legislative committee.
: Keating, Republican of ‘New! The committee, investigating
|| V¥ork: who has been.urging the ‘subversive activities ins Oxtas
: * {passage of Eisenhower-sup-;homa,. produced . information
: [ported legislation empowering. that in 1940.Dr, Halperin had
i \the department to deny pass-/cashed a check for $436 drawn
i Iports to active participants in;on the Bank of Foreign Trade
Soviet skullduggery,  ~ . nN“ Moscow. As a result, Dr.
i The memorandum, citing! Halperin was dismissed from
; teases where passports have, the Univeraity of Oxiahoma,
shad to be Issued to known}. Despite this record, Dr. Hal-
:.Sommunists," devoted consid-iperin managed ta enter Gor-
i “Spable attention to the case of! See HALPERIN, Pazo-A-6:
i Lon a —
1

ikeeping an eyo on the former)
professor's movements for some-|

dthe Latur. American resional‘ag July 15," 1989,

a3 questions concer
shesed Communit

Sy Devanie,
siete alt Come

‘They
In an i eream ome
dabbled in real estate.
Inod sods. Dry Halperin.
tas employed dy the Mexican

_ gereeminent:as a financist cons

- Ts taugnt in

WASH DO “the American School Founda+
STAR. ER . 7

» TAR — ey also became trendy!

A Alfred. K. Steta_ and nist
pens, the former Martha Dodd.)
j@ausdter of a former Unttedr

i Sates Ambassador ta Germany,
ithe fact the Stems had been
demeheated in Soret eamonage
rf
1

—s

Be ag oo

. tame out with the arrest in
iNew York of Jack Soble. a So~
(Mick agent. To araid being ex-
iivaiited to the United States
ito testify before a’ spectal grandé
Vey ca thelr assxctauens with}
We and “the devhic ‘agent:
Bt Morros,” the Steens fled!"
ta Corchosiovakia in utr, t
De. Halperin, described as
plans “thtimately involved

j veces
i :
? HALPERIN.
i Continued Fram First Pace AS a resutt, the Mexi-;t
ey hoe caren was considers
h ¢ Ris cas H
[division of the Office of Stra Oa October 12. Ie te eel
Ttecte Services tthe OSS was perizs left Mektox having
then the United States Civihan otiacced plane reservations iii?
tellisence-Gathering Agency), 'she names of olher persona, {t
jhe. later was transferred ta the
iState Department. In doin’ _ Ta Russta Since 1888 fy
agencies, according to the! The State Department mem-i!
[Elizabeth Bentley testimany, he Sanctum concludes: y
jtransmitted confidential docu-! “We received trfarmationss
ments to a Soviet spy ring, isk pace jTalperin’s Gen:
parture from Mexien th:
Unked to Sry Ring bas eraploned in Anson alt
In 1949, he became head of ths USSR. This was contiemed |
t
wi Rt
istudents section at Boston Uni-|Matverics appeared, ma : they
[Yersity's. College of Liberal Amerean Embasy in’ Moscow!)
Tarts, : jand presented their “ United!;
j_A Near. later, he was first States passports fur renewal.{i
‘publicly identified as a member] “Hatvecin stated ahst hei?
‘of a Soviet spy ring. This came’hed teen in the USSR since}
about when Vice President Devember, 1988 and that he is!
.Nixon..then & California Con-iempioyed by the Soviet Acad}
&ressman, made knowh a topiemr of Sciences where he ts!
[seeret. memorandum on vs-jdxng research . . . relating tou
‘pionase transmitted by FSI!cnterdeveloped countries. H
iDirector J. Edgar Hoover toi ti will be recalled that Hi
ine ate, House on Novem ;perin: is something ef an au!
iber 8. . . yen Laty errcan
In March, 1953, In Boston’sja: tau Ameneen

‘chief of: the Latin Amertcan

mendment when—in a hear-fins at the present tine.”

jimz conducted by the Senate] ~The Soviet Academy of
yInternal Security Subcommut-}Sciexces is directly sudorcinats|
stee+he refused to reply toite the Council of Ministers.”



--- Page 7 ---
14-0000

Mn ahenglen. Jord ©
4 (eps / ho

Thander, $061,196 THE WASHINGTON POST

Halperin, U 8. Ex-Aide,
Is Now a Soviet Official

American” Fmmbansy In Mexico
City, where ho had gono after
being dismissed by Boston
University, and used it to’
leave Mexico on Oct. 13, 1958,
‘The State Department sald},
that shortly after Halperintt
and his wife departed from],
Mexico it received informa.
tlon that he was employed in
Moscow by the Soviet Union.f
= “This was confirmed on July:
fi5, -1960, when thy Halperins
appeared at the Americanl
Embassy In Moscow and pre-}
jsented their U. S- passports}
for renewal,” the = Depart-}-
ment’s report sald, adding:
“Halperin stated that hef!
Rad been in tho U.S.S.R. since):
December, 1956, and that ha is}, fa
employed by the USSR
Academy of Sciences where
. he Is doing ‘research in the
a T i . . Anoclated Peas Tforeign field, specially, retat-
“ : ii nered IN [ing to undeveloped countries.”
a The Depariinent recalled
that Halperin was something
of an authority on Latin-
been compellad to issue pass- laeny passports to Communists American affairs and sald,

. ports under 4 1953 decision of} jar to other persons because of/“Our information ‘indicates

. the Supreme Court, their pelitieal beliefs. that this probably Is the fleld

a . .The Court hetd that the De-} After the ruling, Malperiniin which he is working at the
: o i partment Jacks authority to:applied for a passport at the| present time.” 4

| Asasctatéd Pree
The State Department says,
that Matitice H. Halperin; a) :
former United States Govern.
ment oficial liakad by Senate}.

lavestigators ty Soviet espl].
onage activities apparently ts
serving now as a Latin-Amer-

ican adviser to the Russians.
~ . Halperin- was--head of the
Latin-American Division of
- the Office af Strategic Serv-|-
: ices during the latter. part of;
t : World War U and latee an a:
sociate professor st Boston
University, Befare the war, he
had ‘been ‘on the faculty of
the Universixy of OSlahoma.
In 1934 he was dismissed by] ~
Boston hens after Sen-



--- Page 8 ---
14-0000

“The Stato Department has}: ”

- Benato, investigators to & pou

“memoranda ta ‘support’ of |

. tonal soeamurism,

* espionage

"FORMER U.S: AIDE
AT WORK Ht SOVIB

Ex: Boston. Professor W
in O$S: in World War tt

disclosed that a former United
States Inteuigence olftelal ,
in Moscow working for thes
Mat Govergment.
+ He is Dg. Maurice Halpern .
nm former{ Boston Univernty}?

professor eho was head of
Lau Asnerican Division, of the}
Ottice .bt¢ Strategic Serviges
during Wetld War IT): ©
*" De, .Balperin was dismissed L:
from Baatgn University in 1954
after he refused to say whether
was_a,Cammunist, He :has|
‘been Unked in testimony Betoret i

viet spy tis. Poy
+ The-Athte Department's

Clasura avtas coatained:

Proposed Rw to deny passports
‘to persong supposing interna:

~ ‘The*Supreme Court. ruled call wee
3958 Usat, passports could” not{t:

~ + be: ‘denieg to Communists orf
', others Decuuse of their pout

“bellets.~ . . o

“< After the Supreme Court
ing, ' the : Halperins applied t
_ pe United States Embaniy ing

| Confirmed Inst July

he was proreng. for tho Soviet!
c!

: calle that.
“ ansuthority on

FORMER U. 8. AIDE |-

~ATWORK IN SOVIET

Contlaued From Page 1, Cal 1.

Mexico City (or passports and].
lett Mexico Oct. 13. 1988. Atl
the time. the State Department

huted, they were about to del .

deported from Mexico for Com:

- munist activities.

Reports that _Dr.- Halperint:
was working for the Sovtetl
Government in Moscow were]
1S, the
State Department meniorandumy
Weht-on, when he and. his wite},
-@ppeared at tho embassy to ref!
new their passports,

Embassy - officials reported]

Halperin that he and his wife;
had Been in the Soviet Union}:
mince December, 1939, and that:

Acadenty oof dences.
ch In the foreign :
relating to. uniters

|

affairs, addet tn
mation indicates (hat this pro!
ably is the field In which h
working at the present time.

State Department officials}!
have repeatedly called attention| -

* to the Soviet trade and cultural)

offensive in Latin America,

“Referring to. Dr.: Halepri
employment “by the Soviet:
Academy, the State Depart.
FRent observed that it was di-}!
rectly subordinate to the Soviet! §
- Council of Ministers. |!

“Requested by Keating |

fessional Record of Aug. 10]:

“the memorandum was pe
pared al the Pquest of Senator
Kenneth 1. Kealing. Reputhean
wt New, York, Ne and Senate
Trurmas J vet, Deexrs: ©.

the memorandum a The cons

expressed . regret, a tre tm
that his bill was not Lkety to
De passed In this session of!
Congress, President Exseity
and State Departmen: officials|
have backed the puree off |.
the measure, .
+ Meariwhile, Representative!
Francis E, Walter, Democrat
Pennsylvania and chairman
of the Committee on UnsAmmert
can Activity, said he had om
deceit a month-long pretiminary|
invesugation into Fhe case oft
two missing employes et the’.
National Security Ageney. +
The two employes of the toed
secret. coding” agens
F. Mitchell ant W
Maxtin, are alleged to heme
faaen valuable. secrets to" the
Soviet: Union,
Representative Walter satd

“that he understood that one vf.

the missing men had omadal
ecquiries in thelr agency about
hae U2_reconnalssance plane
HIgAL over the Soviet Unies:

defore it took place on May LL.
Sie Walter di id that he was’
eeavinced that the § dad.

bad advance knowledge of. the
nt = Fr MaTy Posrerst

“the U-2 pilot, was downed in:

the Soviet Union and subse’
quently sentenced to ten
eeteation,

Refused to ‘Appear i

BOSTON, Aug. 31—De. Habs
pra wag officially. dismi
m the faculty’ of Reston!

. University on Jan. 6, 1954, He

Rad retused s summons to ap
pear defore a university com
mittee of review to discuss his’
case,

- Dr, Harold C. Case, president’
of the university. telephoned
De, Halperin in’ Mexico Cry,
offering ‘to pay his eapenses.
to Basten and return But the?

Sty's Latia-. American
mahes



--- Page 9 ---
14-0000

i
i ; -

\
1
i
H
H
i
t

tee S7AR ~ Sep wae) “
“7 at the append Sour, Me uaned it will de eyuiladle to the.
t

Halperin Denies Giving seins rehedt cinemas Pe?

suing to purchees @ oor.”
claw ae

Reds Advice on Latins y--sctenil cn

dexured {o comment on ths}.
mend acd Seater
MouCOW, Soph 3 (APt —tenig Services, aa inieieence

eiacement of on hdr. Halpevin hy
ee ‘Maunce H. Halperin, former ciganssatioa.

eo sctatdig the bet. siaiua It did say Be appoared|”
te Barres ta come up at the emoasyy tn July and,
TUnited ‘States Government ufl> After the war. Mr. Maiperia
got a Wd with Teton Ue Uscow

his ataie re@ Nerring.
. “elal. who cow Lives in: Mosco
1 > lyeatarday accused the Ofate Derrveruty rotesnor. He coat nave ft
ipartment of seruing a “del0er- this job in 1953 drcause here.
: (aod malicious dttorGve”: fusnd’ to tell conaresuonal in-
sbout tls statue bare. veatignlore whether ha ever had
. Sta a typewritten stalament been a member of the Acer:
~ . jMp. Halperin ‘sald: ‘ean Communist, Party.
1 | “hare ts nothing mysterious - Tre dald, mustached $4
or Cubicle -ebout my Dein 18 yegr.oid Mr. Halperin was io-
Moscow... Tam a vltINd cyind Sunday in & Moscow
‘ 7 iprafessos ab tho UBBR ACSCPTY ‘apartment se SF a nesses
° lot Scvenees: and not the Liked man and a
American to be, nsgociated WD! ment on the State Dep:
. i ae . - ments document.
woe Last week Benstor Keating. -
Inepubbean of New York, reed, — Devlines to Ele borair

2 E
ems granted, an omdasy wea
‘

wad.

fan. Ameren pianists:
he yerlorms in & Buretne
guned concert Nail. .
Am a vinitina prosessor ay
SR Academy of Sviences a
ard not the frw American ta > .
be awocisted with ii, 4a some

ur wacina scientats can]
My appoiwnument and”
visa expaicg iy July,
ine Unie States Ene .
Dassy here very well Snows
fy toaenud ad resmirce:
103 oo invowe «theoretical . . noe
wemas feisted to tne eco-
: mie arowth of uncerdeveioped
;Bhone ‘the story » areas For the Slate Departinent,
Mr. Halperin first declined 80 25 ay that fam ‘aavigang the:
admit the newaman into tis :
aparument, but agreed ta meet
bum later tn the. loboy cf a
aflaics. During World War IL nearby ‘hotel where he pram-
(Mp Halperin.wes heed of the Wed toi giro a written sales study of the Laun-american
HLA -Amerean divuion of Ibe Tent qoonomy {190° 1943 to (he css;
‘Unled States Ofdce of Strne! Mr. Halperin appeared pure- ct 1958. Wren my dock ts aude’



--- Page 10 ---
14-0000

|

b alperinSays:
Reds Not Not
Employ Him

4 (UPD)

aa ted)
te De)
Mat he as?
as an adtuses ty the}
oa Latin:

|
|

tion” .
In a statement te regurters.!
jaiperia said he is a gevtesset),

associated with. the Acadecy!

of Scienees of the USSR, wo:
ing on 2 book on Latin Amen!

a azthori-|,

‘

mee Bas-!!

fairs Wes wor
.[ viet government,
Sen.. Kenneth B Nestings}
(RN. .Y. bad the docement/!
enizndd in the Congressenaly!
Record) {j

Keating are. sweenins the bot.
tom of the barrel ty come up
With Wis red hereg Half

*Tkere is nothiss aster}
+] 0¥S ar dadious abou: my Seing!”
In Moscow. Since my arrival,
T have filed twa U.S income
tax retums listing say salary
and emplayer.

“Dam rot wortcg for the,
Soviet: government azy more
than Van Clibum when be,
“}performed in a porernmens.
owned concert hall* 83 con
Uinued. : .

“Tl ama visiting psofessorf
in the USSR Academy otf
Scienees and nop te fest
Ameriéaa “to be associated}
with it. Foe the Stare of De
partment to say that I am ant
adviser lo the Russians ont
Latin American afaics is af
deliberate and malicnss dis!
tortion.

“Specifically, 1 am taking!
a Study of the Latin Aserivaa!:
economy from 193 to tei
Crisis of issa~ _

aA

2



--- Page 11 ---
: woot Soeste provessr OF, Maunce Halponn’s neaty
Soveny yeas ofa,

Rivcs chavce tat comoeled him. to seek employment
WRA ho Navong Unwesscy of Mexuco. R was chance that
ena Bon 8 Dreeyes cost in Moscow. It was chance*
that leg pen to Steacteas sant Cuda. And it was chance
Qt Sreaght Aen 8 Simon Fraser Seven years ago.

7 bist, tune egan warlonay ds Capricious influence over
Rs Heeior Beto ce, Habana was bom, .

3 as BS sesinsson However, he decided

is Movs on ta Bosion* °

This was a “rather fosunate circumstance over which had

£2 Ccaro,” since Atontrag at the bme was still a provinclal

Sy whee Boston was “a mecca, a great cenira of cultura

| 1 lesan Qnd 22 &s Scusnay tacibaos were available to
mR.”

Among ase Bolres uch he mada use of wero the
Eosior Lata Senoci— a saconcary school which boasts
such luminaries ss Banana Francin ang Raion Waldo Emer
$90 AMON is ake — anc Navdrd University.

Re comsieiad Ns poshexe.ate work in Paris at tho Sof
Gonna wich, af that time, was ihe most prestigious university
Botha weed and “ha as 2 had on my way of tfe and |
thinking was'a peraanent one.”

. Wain tnensing tea Soaowe, Dame Fortune stepped lh
“) aS “1 ees apponiod to Me tacuty as a Reader ia North
y Wrencca Cavitation Evan Tcugh | came trom Harvard, the
tovel of competence ana soomsicaton of the French stu:
Sa! 8 WAS Much Achar ang | had to work very hard to keep.
ta with hoa, 7
or comptating Ris doctorate, Or. Hay erin joined tha
tasuny a: Unwersty of Caunema and ‘found that mid+
HV S203 tobe “xe sot"? COUntry. Saston tna Par

wore Muca cosaly nied Pan weve Boston and Oxtahoma.":

However, chance interweant fo fescue him trom what

+ Coutd have deen anursé of accterent years'in-a then smal,

OAS roma? wuversay on the Anenca Pisiries, taming them

Io yaos spendin "an cass SAN Ctue.”

G.csasaegnas  -

“atw2s Corin tne Cegression and jeds were scarce, $90
Ad Urvorscy attracted a meter of pron teachers and
feS2CCLOS whose test Choe TANI Kol have bzen Qala:
hora. : :

“Aad whsa you Rave 8 Groo of pe0ni2 the that, in addition
to the Casormunny of micerstanang and learning to aozteciato
the wtues of mone Aterca ott a was something iat
SHINS St 8:9 for the rest of ay ite”

Tha Sacond Worg Wo eNmcted Or. Huzenn's soioun
2) lho Uiversidy of Gvatcs at he ones ne

"COMMENT", Dec 75 issue
. (alumn igazine of::~.

Simon Fraser University

in British Colombia.

BMaurice Halperin, Simon Fraser's oldast professor, Isa a
-kdva musician who has played with the Now Ww ‘ostminster

Sympnrony Orchestra. :

Swategic Services. a special research and tntetiyence
Agency attached to the Joint Crve!s cf Stall: .

Thad a front row’seat in the Dianning of some of the most
interesting operations of tne war,” he says. "i consicer my
eapenences thare were ‘at least ine equivalent of a second
PnD because | was associated win a whole group of sonal
Scientists m Slferent disciplines.

“Tarough ths, | aad the seatzation that we had practical
Matiers to consiaer in the socias screrces..as wel'aa It.co-
retical ones. And [learned tha vatue of co-oparativa effort,
tae vaue of getting work done on hme, and the vutuu of
ethoency mresearcn,

“H heibec me to see the relatorsn's between tho social
sceences and prechcal probiems. | became more oriented
toward prcaiesn soning inan | had been helore.” —~

2
;


--- Page 12 ---
14-0000

. - ‘ _¢

so Dame Fortune keeps pooping up

.-

' in tife of SFU’s.oldest professor.

. — and has taken him.to Mexico, Cube,
". . fescow — andio ‘best place of el

After the war, Dr. Matperin worked with the United Nations
for a counie of years and then joined the faculty of Boston
University where ha was involved in the establishment of an
interdiscipinary department of Latin American stucies. a

During this period he visited Brazil twice, lecturing at the
University of Sao Paulo and’ serving as a consultant to the
state government of Sao'Paulo. After his second visit, he was

decorated by the Brazilan government with the Order of tha.
“gn tho country — The Rise and Decne of Fidel Castro: £e

Southern Cross.

Mioticious way.
“My stay at Boston coincided with the most intense petiod

“Sof MecCarthyism:and this raised problems for a great number

of porto at tho timg. In.my own caso, | was given tho cho:co

_ Of Co-oporating with-tho inquisition or,.o3 it turned out, losing

my job.

“Among other disagreeable aspects of ¢o-onerating, it
wou'd have turned me into an informer against peopte who,
@s far as | know, had committed no crime. {Just couldn't think
of fecing my stucents with their knowledge that I was an

informer.” .

Leaving Boston University, ho went to the National Unk .

versity of Mexico City where he remained-for six years. While
working there, ho did some'consulting work for the Mexican

Government, thereby gaining turher practical experience |

on the probiems of undercevelopment in Latin America.

This experience led directly to his next Gosition — athree- |
‘ar appointment at the Academy of Sciences in Moscow. -

ye e
Halperin oxpiains:

” “At that time, the period when Kruschev was trying to -

foosen up somo of the rigid controis of Stalin's Gictatorship,

thore was a desire at the Académy to have some western |
expcrtiso on Latin American., devetopmentat Problems. in -
other words, my Mexican experience was a direct prerequi :

site for tha Moscow Invitation.

“it's strange -how, in retrospect, what Seemed to be a

rather ditticu't choice in 1953 tumed out to be very iucky.
You never know. Something happens that can crush you or,
on the contrary, -can make you heauthier and
than you've everbeentefore, ot

“Any, when the invitation came frei Moscow, | was foot
foose end free. My Status in Mes was always {hat of a
visiting professor, so had no prov... at secunly — tenure
or pension, lor oxamp'e — to tie
had nothing to fose and everything to gan.”

Or. Hatpurin spent threo yec's at tne Academy and found
ft to bo en extraordinary expencnce. “| wasn't there as. a
tourist; neither was I.there as an outside researcher. L was,
cctualty in the machine, with no permanent ties to it. was
working in the factory, rather than just studying it.”

Foto ence eagain intervened In his lifo, this tine In the form
of tha celebrated Latia American guerrilla toader, Cho

Guevera. . _

tt'was then that chance Intortered agsin, this tine ina most

more robust |

“town. when it came. 1 *

’
/ ,

8

“Late ono night, there was a knock o7 ey deor and t
Opened it and there stood Che with a couse of his Cuban
tienes. Ha had been told about me by muta frends in
Mexco and they suggested that, in wow ef tne Aved tor
competent educators and social scientists in Cuda, tmnt |

» be interested in accepting an inviteticn to teach at the Unr
-versity of Havana.”

__AS ithappened, Or, Hatoerin wes interestec. He scent
Next six years in Cuba, and alter lesving, procuced:a book

Essay in Contemporary History. it was pudtshed by tne Unie -
versity-of California Press and a second eaton, in paper:
“beck, has recently appeared. {incidentaty, Cr. Hztoern's
Published work spans 45 years and “several thousana
pages.")
“Aa with tho Moscow appointment, it was the fet that he
” was freed of concemns about Job secunty, since he Pau none,
which allowed:him to accept Guevara's otter. .
Alnough Cuba was “Aa very pleasant country,” Or, Hak
" porin found life there to be somewhat aiscencernng since,
+ “as a highty-paid foreign expert, t lived hugh off tt hog ana

"> didn’t Share tho austerity of the rest of the country.

. “And It was troubling, you know, when neighbors wou'd
krock on our coor to sca if we could spare a ttumbictul of
Salt of a ladiespoon of cooking oil and there we were, sitting ~
with everything at cur disposal” -

And a turther quirk of fate, naturally, brought him to Simon
Fraser in 1968..He'd met a Canedian while in Navara and one

‘dey, soul e yea" later, ha received agnane cal “tromanisce

Called Burnaby.” It was the samo Canadian, imag tum to

Participate in a seminer on Latin America, with “2d expenses

paid.” .

.__ When ho received the invitation, in the spring of 1$68, he
had already resigned his position in Navenaard was gionning
to return to the United States the. foilowng Sestember,

« “When the invitation came, | thought, ‘Two weéss? Why net?",
so Faccepted and came up here and, like the man who came
to cinner, they couldn't get rid cme. ot

:  _“inever.dreemed.f.would end up in Canada Tree-querters

© ofa century after my father tettit, but f dow feet trorcucnly’
essimilated to the Canadian énvironment.”'n fact, he's sowell
assimilated that he is now bsted in the Canadian ection of
Who's Who, °

Ouring his well-travelied lite, Or. Halperin has hag the orpor
. tunity to teach al a number ¢f reputadic msptutens in North
America, Europe and Lain America but he sys thet he's
“never been in a more congenial glace than Smon Fraser,
never in my tite, ~
“it's the dest piace, all in alt, that I've ever Be. Stucents
and facuity have it very good here end-i'm not ty 75
2bout the sslencid scenery ang the mild etmote. f
e ties for tearning, teaching, research and recreat & .
steady customer at tha swimming pool ant ina r
know = ere macziticent.”



--- Page 13 ---
14-0000

- ‘OF COORDINATOR OF. INFORMATION AND IN 1945 WAS IN THE RESEARCH SECTION > :

SUBJECT OF 201 (Last, Pivat, widdle)

tery 867 #3

SECRET. ee So 2 Oa,
- (BPen Fitted np

ce fhe , oe oe, . 4

. EXTRACT AND CROSS REFERENCE =: . Be

COCUMENT LOENT IFICATION
bate OF coc.

6 July 1076 |

SOC: SyMEOL 8 HO.

LOND 74209 ©

(Cat1ON OF RECORN COPY

3]. 6 nn

LnOc, euesect

PLMBLANKET .
~ SOURCE INFORMATION

SOURCE CRYO TONyiN Dated OF INFO. ~ _ “evaiuaTion

XTRACT, Tan, cite doc. Tigttibat ten Biaeee. We.

GUAR HAS" PROVIDED THE FOLLOWING: © tT

W MAURICE HALPER N.. BORN BOSTON, MASS. 3 MAR 1906,

WIFE EDITH NEE F Rl SCH, BORN 6 JULY 1907, WABASH, INDIANA. . TWO

CHILDREN BORN 1939 (NAP 2934, NAMES UNKNOWN, -sURJ IS IDENTIFIED AS ves
A COMMUNIST. FROM 1931 _TO 1941,-.HE WAS PROFESSOR. OF LANGUAGES AT oe

_ UNIVERSITY OF OKLAHOMA. , od 94] .HE,WASSOCIAL SG LENCE ANALYST, OFFICE ; oo

“OF OSS. “IN 1953 HE LEFT THE USA FOR MEXICO. ON 10 NOV 1958 HES
‘WENT TO AUSTRIA FROM SWITZERLAND WITH NUS WIFE AND CROSSED, INTO .
CZECHOSLOVAKIA, IN DEC 58 HE WAS BELIEVED TO BE IN ‘Moscow. IN 1960 :
HE WAS IN Moscow WORKING FOR THE. SOVIET GOVERNMENT AS AN AUTHORITY on’
LATIN AMERICA, IN 1962 SUBJ AND HIS" WIFE. WERE . IN CUBA ‘REPRESENTING:

“ONATTONAL GUARDIAN", ‘RIS CONNECTIONS: IN 1942. HE WAS ENPLOYED BY -

THE “LATIN AMERICA BRANCH; HE PROVIDED OSS: -AND STATE DEPT REPORTS TO / a
THE RIS THROUGH MARY PRICE ‘AND ELIZABETH BENTLY. JAGUAR SAYS THEY | :
HAVE ADDITIONAL ESPIONAGE INFO IN THEIR FILES.

Indicate The Subject, Project or 201- 1284
201 File No. In Which This
Form Is To Be Filed. :

128561

HALPERIN, Maurice Hyman

SECRET . 7 TER mpber- ct ay: 407652! (yeas

 erlamey +

wpa i DR a oe

ee, ee

ehoxt


--- Page 14 ---
14-0000

pe

Fern HP: 6) secret (] CONFIDENTIAL [7] INTERNAL =) UNCLASSIFIED

os

oO UNCLASSIFIED Oth wat C] CONFIDENTIAL C] SECREF ~

IP/ANSE
- EXT. 9149- TuaE'BU3

“SECRET €2 TMPDET CL BY 004108

Ol - QESE/



--- Page 15 ---
14-0000

CAUTION - THIS FORM REQUIRES
Be SECURE STORAGE ~

so qasmance Nee AES

|actuse ALRASTO

___ Chief, WOMUSE revo ce mas ;

po

Coo cnet of Station, Ottawa 7h, 2s _- ee
, : Laaasd FHASOVE G mments and ‘Transmittal of D Magazine. Article”

~ CKTOP FEASOVE KMSTONEZ an | Soviet Agent Maurice. Hyman HALPERIN. (201: 701285:
ACTIN REQUIRED - RAHRENCTS

Action: FYT.-.

1, FHABOVE reports ‘that on 13 January 1976 it again spoke to Subject
who, althous! h remains ‘approachable, declined to elaborate on previous
' comments conceming the 1940's: Cencerning himself, Subject said that
he and his wife toured Israel, _ Italy, Greece, Spain and England in the
‘summer of 1975. Work on the second volume of his book on Cuba has
_ fallen behind. . HALPERIN left the impression that once the Cuba book is -
- out of the way, he will commence his autobiography. He also expects...
that Simon Fraser University will extend his teaching appointment to
August 1977,

2. . Transmitted herewith as received from FHABOVE is an article on .
Subject taken from the December 1975 issue of "COMMENT", the alumni
magazine, of Simon Eraser, University in British, Columbia. oo. oe ccs warnes

oP et etme imme at

her ad

“adrian oO. BAGHORST

Attachment: .
As.stated h/w. . .. .

_ Distribution: i : oo .
" \3< C/SEW/att. b/w © eo no
-2 -C/LA watt. b/w (case) 8 Te
2 - C/WOMUSE w/att. h/w (i/hee ).
2- C/EUR w/att. n/w i Ejneje)*

E2, IMPDET |

ospatot TMDL And MS
OCOAI9102 .

' 22 January 1976

HOS RE MUMEER
01-0128561

SECRET

a


--- Page 16 ---
14-0000

;
’
3
i
7
!
4
2.

+, Wesiemn state lo de

Cy Rick Ryda .

Fostuno, of chance,has Played a major rote in Simon: Fraser,
Poitticar Science protessor’ Or. - “Maunse- “Haipenn's neay
Sovéniy years of ito.

wes chance that compered him to seok employment.
with. (to Notional University of Memco. ft was chance thet
eomed him a three-year post in Moscow. it was chanca*
thstled nim fora teaching stint in Cuda. And it was chance,
that i brougnt hint Simon Fraser seven years ago. .

tn tact, ferturie degan wieicing its capricious influence over
his sto even batora Or. Halponn was ‘born.

M poot to the New Won atthe tum of the cen.
ontreal as his dostination. However, he decided
te: move onto Boston.” - 7

5a “rattier fortunate circumstance over which Ihag
f9 cenirol.”’ since Moniiea! at tho tule was still a provincia!
e Boston was “a metropolis, a great centre of cuture
and learning afd ad its splendid faciliti€s were available 12
mo.”

3 those facilities which he mada use of were the
A Latin Scnsol - a secondary school which boasts
Such luminaries as Benjamin Frankun ana’Raian Waldo Emen
‘$00 among its alumni — and Harvara University.

Coane which, at nat timé, was the most prest>:gus university
3 and “the impact i it Bad on my way of life ang”
thinking was. a pe: smanentone.”

tevel of competence and sopnistication of tne French stu
dents was much higher ang {had to work very hard to keep
&— with them. *

‘K@ arotner couatry. Soston cna ad Pang
Ware mucn closely related: than were Boston and Oalaroma”

Hawever, chance intervened ‘to rescua him trom whet
Could have beén’a number.ot ma.itereat years in a then smal
SAd remote usiversiy on the Amencan Praiies, temng then
inoyesrs speatin “an oasis ethigh cudure.”

Or. Ha'zerin explains:
was Cuting tha Gepressi¢n and eds were scarce. so
the university attracted a:numter’ot pagm tedcners and
fescdichers whose fist cficice mignt not rave Deen Ota
bona. j

“And when you have a group of pedoia tke that; in aacizon
fo the capomunily of vagerstana.ng and learmung to appreciate ~
tho witues of micnta America, wet ut was sonaining tha:

stayed win mg far tne rest of ‘my bta:” .

Tha Second World War interrupted Or. Hyperin’s Soioum
&! tho Univers.ty of Oxlanoma ana he jones tne Ciice of

1s

Hl wad /- C¢eA-IGJe Z -

rCompieiad his" post-yraduite work in’Paris af iia:Sak . ose

ization. EVen though | cama trom nanaee tre

. “COMMENT™, Dec 75 issue
: (alurni rag gat ‘ine of
Siron r University

in British | Colombia. +)

ecg po we

()

6
wece

.
°

Simon Fraser's etdest professor, Is a |
“Keon musician who-has payed wua the New
Symphoay’ Orchestra. . .

Strategic Services,’ a. specs! ressxren and | abuence
agency anacned'to the Jort Cvets cf Saft © .
“Wnad a.tront row seat a ne ay 6
wuerestig Gperanons of the wsr,7, “Ll goasider my.
exsenerces there were at least equvaent of a second
PnD because I was assocated wes a anole Group of socul
Seri sis in GiHerent ascownes, .
“Tarough tws, | nad tie reizeton but we Aad practical
mailers 19 ConsiGer wi Wie Soci SoS. aS Wed 35 ICO
repeal ones. And [warned Ra wave ct cO-OpGraive etfort
the soue of gemng wor Gwe oa ame. and ine value of |
eiency in research, :
“UW nebec me to see the reanors=a detween tho social
SGERCES ad pracbCalorobkNns. 1 Oecarie more oriented
Coward prcoigia SonNiig Ihan lAcd Deen catcre.”



--- Page 17 ---
14-00000

a

.

m Dame Fortune

ty

KEEPS PCppirig u2

' "in life of SFU's oldest professor
7 aid Las taken hin to Mexico, Cuba,
. _ Moscow — and to ‘best place of all’

i ‘ar, Or. Hatoeria worked mih the United Nations
for a coupic of years and then joined the faculty of Boston
University where he was involved in the establishment of an
interdiscipinary department of Lat:n Amencan studies.

Ouring this period he visited Brazt twica, lecturing at the
Unversity’ “of Sao Paulo and Sefwng as a corsullant to the
state government of Sao Pauto.‘Atter his second wisit, he was,
eecorated by the Braztian goverriment with the Order of the
Soythern Cro

ttwas then
, Moiicious way. i
“Ay stay at Boston coincided: wth the most'intense period
of McCarthyism and ths raised problems for a great-numbor
of pcopia at tho timo. In my own.cn3e, i was given tho choice
of co- oporating with tho induistion or, 03 it turned out, losing
my Job.

“Among other disagroeable aspects of co-operating, it

wou'd Have turned me into an informer against people who,
as far as I knew, had committed no cnme. | just Couldn't think
of facing my stucents with ther knowiodge that | was an
informor.”

Leaving Goston University, he went.to the National Unt.

it chance intertered again, : this time inamost

government, thereby gaining turner practical exnerience

* onthe probit ioms of underdeve‘oament in Latin America.

-_/ , This experience ted directly to his next position — a three-.
year appointment at the Acacemy of Sc:ences in Moscow. °

Halperin oxpiains:

” "At that time, the peiiod when Kruschev was trying to |

loosen up somo of the rigid controls of Stalin's dictatorship,
thore was.a desire at the Academy to have some western

expertise on. Latin American ceveloprental pedbiems. In -

_ other ‘words, my Mexican e: ‘penence was a direct prerequi-
~ site forthe Moscow invitation.”

“u's strange how, in retrospect, what seemed to be a

rather dilficut choice in 1953 tumed. out to be very lucky.
You never “know. Sometning happens that can crush you or,

on the contrary, can make you hearer and more robust ~:.

than you've ever been before.
“And, when ‘the invitation came
bose ard reg. My status in Me. :
visiting professor, ' $06 }had no prob- . otf security — tenure
of pension, for oxample — to tie sown when it came. t

had nothing to fose and everything to can.

Moscow, | was foot-

Or, Hatovrin spent threo yec*s at tno Academy and found .

& to bo of extraordinary expenence. “I wasn't there, asa
tourist; neither was | there as an outside researcher. 1 was
ectuaty in tha machine, with no permanent hes tort! was

werking in tho factory, rather tnan just studying it.”
Fate cnco again intervened tn his hfe, this timo in the form

of the celebrated Latin Americ2n guerritta loader, Che

Guevara.

i Y

‘ “Rock ‘on-our Coor to see if we could scare a thimdicfut of

_ Fraser in 1968..He'd met a Canadian while in Havana ang one

> eatled Burnaby.” tt was tho same Canad:an. it

+ “When the. invitation cama, I thought. ‘Two weeks? Wny not

was always that of ar

“ eties for tea:

s

“Late ono night, there was a kneck on my deer and} -
opened it and there stocd Che with 3 covunie of his Cuban
frencs. He had been teld about me by mutual frends in
Mexico and they suggested imat, mn wew'ct tne eved tor:
competent ecucators and social se:entsis a Cuda, bmg at
be interested in accepting an invietcn to teach at the Une
versity of Havana.”

As it happoned, Dr. Halperin wes interested. He scent the
Ment six years in Cuda, and after teanng. procuces a book
on the country — The Rise and Dechre of Ficel Castro: Ar’
Essay in Contemporary History, It was Quorshed by tne Uni:
versity of California Press and a second edition, in paper:
beck, has recently appeared, (Incicentatly, Cr. Hatoerin’s
published work spans “3 years and “severat thousang,

pages.") i

(As with tho Moscow appointment. it was the foct that ‘hols.

was freed of concerns about job secunty, since hy hi pad non
which allowed him to accept Guevara's .
Although Cuba was “a very pleasant country.” Cr, Hat
perin found lite there to be somewhat ciscencerting sinc
“as a highly-paid foreign expert, | iived hig lt the hog an
didn’t sharc the austerity of the rest cl the country?
“And it was troudiing. you know, when neighbors “would -

salt of a tabiespoon of cooking oil and there we were, sil tang
with everything at cur disposal.”
And a further quirk of fate, naturaty, brought him to Simon

omaniace
g him to
participate ina seminar on Latin Amer: ca, wah “all: hexpenses
paid.” ;
When ho: tecelved the invitation, in the sering of 1968, he
had already tes signed his position in Havara.and was plonning
td return to the United States the fotowng Sectemt:

ha received a otane call

ay. aout ayeer

so laccepted and came up heré.and, bhethe man who came .
to cinner, they couttn' t get tid ofme. .
“Inever creamed t would end up in Canada, Three-qusiters

Dut ht row fee! thoreughly

ilated' that he is now listed in the. Canadian ecttion of
Who's Who, :

Ouring his well:travelied life, Dr. Matzerin has had the eroer-
tumty to teach at a number ef reputads smiutens.in Ni
. America, Europe’ and Lain Amenca dut he says thet h
“never been in a mere congenal proce tran Smon Fraser,
never in my ite,

“ir's the best olace, al in afl, that Ie ever be
and faculty have it very ccod here and Im no
adout the soiencid scenery and tne mis ¢-m.
ing, teaching, research anc recrea*
Steady customer et the swimming pec: ant tne
know — are magniticent.”

Ler fay shl



--- Page 18 ---
14-0000

1
t
1

CrO-N- £5 1-D-E-N-THT-
-~ when Filled In

(date)

“Reviewof 201 File on U.S. Cletzen

In accordance with the DDO's notice vf 9 December 1974; 2 oe
T have reviewed the 201 file on  #.#ee Ce AS” (surname)
(201 number indicated below), and. have Setermined that te-can
most accurately be categorized as indicated below:

ry ghould be closed,

| ] witting-collaborator. Ol Code Ale

of 1 ‘potential viteing collaborators. ads tee ened wet
* OF Code Az. ; — Oe | oo

| , former witting ‘collaborator’ (relationship tera nated).
* OU Code A3. :

potential witeing collaborator never contacted (securteys
reasuns, derogatory information), @£ Code A4. oo

fa Oe szirtseene on case “da. Oey involving a foreiga
intelligence or security service). Or Code AS... tL

Cc , alt others. o1 I Code Abs
or Code M, .

laborator.
2.

Signed i _ _. A197:

(initials) . - (datey

This document _is'a permanent ‘part. of this: files soos

201-_-
ED LMPDET 4

When Filled In | CL BY _054979

C-O-N-F-E-D-E-N~T-1-Aa-1



--- Page 19 ---
1.00000 _ : cee De

(ST SSEGHBRTIE Np 7

Revige yi G01 File on U.S Ctetzen

In. sccordance with the DDO's notice of 9 December. 1974,
1 have reviewed the 201 file on Aa prpy — (surname)
“(208 nuaber indicated below), and have determined that it can .
Bost accurately. be categorized as indicated belov: .
| | should be closed. - . . . BF
. [] witetng icottaborator. a1 Code Al.” /
: . jae) a oo. . : :
as [ 7 Potential witting collaborator; date.opened z i
. wel. a a :
- OI Code A2. . Coe a . . .
: 7 former witting collaborator (relationship terainated),
—~ OL Code A3.
; } Potential witting collaborator never contacted (securit
— reasons, derogatory information). OI Code a4.’ *
eda nae bet * IX} codesrtaterligence ease Cire. involving a foreign
: x

intelligence or, security service).. OI Code AS.

oa

Cy all 7

OI: Code a6.

‘&

on) ge

(initials) ; : (date)

Tais document is a permanent Part of thts file.

> 201- CURSSEL

. E2 IMPDET
When Filled In’ CL BY 054979 .

CONFI BEER ET TAL



--- Page 20 ---
14-0000

Sting, and asex

paws are _ ; . ermern
The Rise and.Decline of Fidel Casizo

by Maurice Halperin
toma Press; $12.95)

Uoiversity ot Cy

At the end of a pa face describing the
cephoric carly days of the Cuban Rew
etution Marie 1 erin
shad tO CRIAEE In
eHleet, this atntude sy mbolizes his nev
meat of Castra and
Cady in this nest wlume of a two-pait
staty of the nvulumen from the fist
doyved Fitcheme tothepresent. A note
o@hustratign waich oxy nally marks
fas noirstive ef the fist five years of

the rewetian undout tedly Comes from ,

vhis sense of the untulilied pronice of
we July Sah Atovement, For a givat
many Western

Smet ted by a tigid party

“pyess secishen.” rether than the
Metusts nevesities af work norms,
Blearegival eensoemity and sac ice,
Alter several wets of living in Cuba, -
through ite best ond. Weakest inome ts,
Ralyerin fewts that: this Pessibility is
ertingnishad, Ore fools bathe a vd
Vere much fey it to sued? Hie Kink
is on explananen cf why the revolution
Loo foe, . _
Akhough the current ‘volume only
fovers ‘the fine five xears of the reve +
of Bovaks into’ the
Sey to keep the neat years’
Amind Evciything obout the
Won was.ia tue as he sees it, but
at the ‘some ume C.
heavate ond adver s
: iM. becvover atic suciahsm
fiom
hi bea:
ution daa’
Crete bane tee the PMS Soviet
ut Crrchskn chie —

er hument

almost ineviudie,

is that

fine must be
MON aN oir event Far ns
few he ow Mtnly oft the

famente:

and the first to proclaim a.

fomgn paey of the cevstines (the
valy patios ithe book sta Castan
starnig des Ie tap tothe seers Union),
I it is acware to say that the revalu-
ton was pushed leftward and finally
into.an aMiance with the Soviet Union
by the inept atidshostile rohey of the
United States, then it is also ue Mat
Cuba's tate has continued te depend
upon the interaational s le between

the US and the Soviet Union, While
Cast may dave been ¢ fitted ta
Cuban nationalism and social reform at
home, he well, iwnically, only achieve

thete goals by means of an anyressive
foreign pMicy,

Castro remains a vague and biustery
figure while. Che Guevara figures hardly
at all, By pling: wh Semphasis elses
where, Hawtin’ tells the story of the
“‘reealuthyy thipugh the events whica
stouched tiem the out
thase which ctiected its ties to the Cams
Most important were tie

Strugsle of the USS, the changing
Ameiicon. presidency, the rite af tlie
Culbon Comaunist Party, the CIAL end
so on, Gaiis

operative
thand knowhsi
nts, he pis together a iaw 25
mading of Castro's ‘speeches. pelic
changes and Givi conteat. The shitting
and rather “intevisive Altitude of the
sewwlutio nat artistic
for examplo. has
Weed te bahkince
orthedtoay
on Communists,
freedoms by Western
sama hascalways boven to
ponder

Stenimedd in:
contlivting .
Cuban ang
ine preate:
intellny

sertowith the

haps this connaticty pokey was
dawen df ine other reson than
Cuty’s onvintos depomtener upon

athe

do, pauticulaly

‘.

absolute recess

Sand indecision nm

_ dovels,

. Of the revolution and of the impact of

revolution.

am provide her with ene ave in any,

Case, When Castia optat te exploit the .

Coll War and let Khnishebew fs the - . u
{theeri uo

Pinpoint. team

fess ef the reve)

yvta necessily that
could only be met with outside help,
Castro's Own impatience; incfheienvy
os PACTS Worse,
From the eaily attempts la induste
fo the abrupt and de astaling decision
fo produce a mammoth surar crop in
1970, the Cuban cconemy, the author
argues, has continually sunk to |
The result is Castro's depe: ry
sion

upon the Soviet Untan, an adivis
of failure, .

alperin’s emphasis on foreign affairs
makes good sense, but le fitde room:
for discussion of the ioteinal dynamics

social reforms. on the Popul.
makes whal Castro said and idc-and
the revolution itself, evplicable only if
# sort of code of international affairs,
However, given the valatile nature of
Cuban politiés and the Cott War, it:
still scems too carly ta wiite off the’

> James Gilbert - ne

AAT B: atap

Wiciens|-aethy



--- Page 21 ---
14-0000

-“eodld remotely
appointments and failures that: lay ahead, |
* Other setbacks, combined with’ the fallure of

grandiose but.

. wadlinching charisma of Fidel

CHALSTIAN SCIENCE MONITOR
17 January 1973 | -

Tidel Castro .

. en, : ,

‘The Mise and Decline of Fidel Castro — Ag

Essay ty Contemporary lilstory. by Maus |

‘In. Berkeley, Los Angeles, Lon-
ity of California Press. $12.95.

By Philip W; Bonsai

Mourice Halperin has been forced qui.of
{wo teaching positions at. American univer-

‘elttes because of his poiltical beltefs. Ho spent’

three years on the faculty of Soviet

Academy of Sciences, went to Cuba In 1062 at-

the invitalfon of Che Guevara and, though his
relations with Guevara quickly deteriorated,
epentaix years at the Univeratly of Havana.

Thourh one mtcht expect from” such a
background that dreary mix of the stully and

the shrill ao often associated with the polem- '

tes-of the far lett or eight, Professor Halpe-
rin’s book Is 4 work of insight, wit and
understanding.

Ta thls book he concentrates on the first five
years of Gastro’s mule, through 1964, with a

sequel to corhe. However, this volume con- -

tains.enourh about the Inter years to warrant
the use of the word “decline” tn hig title. ©

After stressing the pride and optimism of
the revolution’s {{th anniversary, he writes
that none of those present at its celebration
imagine the = dis:

and that on. the tenth anniversary’ of the

Revolution. there would be only bitter auster-
ity and hard: work — and the tarnished but

theirenthusiasm.” 7 .

Professor ‘Halperin’s account of Caatro’s
first.two years in power (when the author was
not yet In Cuba) does not give due credit to
the United: States. After all; Initially ‘the
United: Sintes did make efforts to find an
Accommodation with Castro, despite the

slatter’s vicicus antl-Americanism and nis

plundering of American properties in ways

.Rot even provided by Castro-dictated legistar
‘en,

‘presumably reluctant and sceptical Russians!

| BTOUsE ,

on™ :

Nor Goce he adequately explain how, after
the poitey of accommodation had beeaaban-
doned, tnjudicious American economic nana:
tlons plus the Bay of Pigs failure left the;

no chotee other than massive support fo!

Castro and Guevara,
Dut when Castro and’ Khrushchev had

October, 1962, confrontation with: President

Kennedy,:: without informing Castro ‘first, |

much tess consulting him, was: deeply hu-
millating to his Cuban ally. .

Yet by April of 1853 (he sulks and atrains of

us (AN had been banished, With
d chetorle the two aufocrats be
help peapies and themsolves Into the
ar euphoria that surrounded Cag
to Russla, How {his was done isthut
one engaging example of Professor Halpo-
rin’s analytieand narrative latents,

This exuberant réconeittation did not prove
lasting. Khrushchev was overthrown — per:
haps partly because
stratepic Involvement!
port-of subversion and i
American repu Y
cally undesirable hy the. Kremlin. .

Guevara's. fatal campaign {a Bolivia and

gcinid Schemes’ for Industri-
Eizatian and-africultural diversifteation at
home, considerably diminished Castro's
alature. .

His downward curve was further accelera>

atter alx-years: of prepar.
hortations = to produce ‘te
sugar in 1070 and bythe

Yons and ex
million tons si
disruption of-the Giban ec
had caused. , Cast

with his Russian patrons smacked more than
, .

alittle of submissions.

, oo . oh

Kennedy had lived some:

sters of the Cuban people's dea.

of fis unprofitable:
tin Cuba. Castro's ex.
nsufrection to other -
oiles was considered tactl-;

my that effort:
ro's later -réconelitations °

(per

Professor Halperin alao describes the
Washington initiated exploration during the
{inal weeks of President Kennedy's Hie, of &
dasia far discusstons between the Cuban and
American governinents. He bdetieves that It
thing constructive:
might have evolved’ from {tie effort. His
conclusion 1§ debatable, since Aine yeare
have now elapsed without any significant
positive development. we
During those.riine years there tas indeed
Deen @ cooling.down of American attitudes,

toward Cuba, cos
But Castro's attitude toward the United’

States has not changed.-His cencept Is atti
that Ms people, armed to the teeth and ,

knowing only what he chooscs to tell them,
must remain .dilndly united, around. their
Maximum Leader, ready to thwart Wr “plots
ot the ance defeated but
cunrepentantimperialists. -

This is unfortunate, Although a return ‘to

the atd association betweelthe two countries
in neither desirable nor possible, the people of
both’ would profit from A rational rejation-
‘ship. This will not be‘eary to establish even
when bath governments are truly ready ‘to

face the task. Meanwhile inthe ight of |
Protesser Hatperin’s brilliant account: of ©

contemporary Guba, 4 seema reasonadic te
speculate that Increasing numbers of Cas:

tro’s subjects are less willing now to entrust

their lives to the phenomenally pifled orches-
trator of. mass emotions, - politically often

-astite’yet repeatedly Incompetentin xo many
fields — who has been thelr abgolute ruler
since 1959. . a) ‘

Phitip Bonsol wag ‘American Am-.. °

“bassador to Cuba, 1959;1960,'the first two
_ years of: Castro's rule. He isthe author of
“Cu Castro,cand the United States”
(University of Pittsburgh Press). se

a wickedly"
rn ens



--- Page 22 ---
}4-00000

CHRISTIAN sctenre TONITSA
7 January 1973

del Castro

.Arigeles, Lon.
Prese. 612.08,

"By Pailip W. Donial

Maurice Halpérin has been foreed out-of
fro t ching positions.at American Univer.
Slles'because of his Polltical beitets. nt
‘three “years: on the faculty of tie Soviet
Academy of Sciences, went to Cuba tr 1683 at
the Invitation of Che Guevara and, though. Ne
relations with Guevara quickly deteriorated,
-apent six years at the University of Havana.

Though one might expect from such ‘a
background that dreary mix of the stufty and
the shritt 30 often associated with the polem.
Ics of the far left or eight, Professor Halpo-
fin's book is a work of insight, wit and

“understanding. mo.

‘In (his book he concentratesion the first five
years of Castro's fule, through 1084, with a
sequel. to cérhe. However, this volume con.
taths enough about the later years-lo warrant

" Uhe use of the word “decline” inhistitle. - :

;,. After stressing thie pride and optimism of
“the revolution’s fifth
of those
Temotel;

Castro and Guevara. .
But when Castro and Khrushchev had
“ Became masters of the Cuban people's dea
Uny, Professor Halperin comes Into his own.
Hts description of the relations between those
. ‘Wolatite and voluble ruters ts a delight. The
Chairman's surrender over the missiles in his
October, 1962. confrontation with President
Kennedy. without informing Castro, first,
much less. consulting him, -was- deeply fu
miltating to his Cuban ally.

Yet dy April of 1963 the sulks and Strains of

“the previous fall had been- banished. With
Uncontested rhetoric the two aufocrats de
mused: their peoples and themselves into the

spectacular euphoria that surrounded Cas.
tro’s vieit-te Ruasta. How this was done ts but
one engigink exainple of Professor Halpe-
lytic and narrative-talents.

IN exuberant reconciliation did not prove
ing. Khrushchev was overthrown — pen
Partly because of his unprofitable
strategic involvement tn Cubs. Castro's: en,

- port of subversion and insurrection to-other

publics was considered: tacth.
ible‘by the Kremlin. oa
fatal campaign in Bolivia. and

b . combined wiih the fatture of
krandiose but unsound schemes for Iindustr.- wt
allzation and agricultural diversification at. .
home, considerably diminished Castro's
stature,

Jtis downward curve was further accelera--.
ted by failure — after six years of prepara-
ons and exhortations — (o Produce ten.
million tons of sugar: in 1970.and by the”
disruption of the Cuban eco:
Dad. ¢

American ‘re;

Guevara:

- Washington-initiated exploration during the
{inal weeks of President Kennedy's life,-of a

conclusion ts debatable, since nine years
have fiow elapsed: without ‘any significant

nine years there ths indeed:
down of American attitudes

Maximum-Leader,
ot the once defeated’ but still wickedly i
‘unrepentant imperialists: . . ‘ a ;

This is unfortunate. Although a return to | j
the'old association between the two countries | ‘ : .
is neither desirable nor possible, the People of |
doth would profit from a rational relation.
ship. This wtil not be easy to establish even
‘hen both governments are truly ready to. ¢
face the task. Meanwhile tn the Heht of |
Professor Halperin's brilliant account of: |
‘contemporary Cuba, It seems-reasorable to. *
speculate that Inéreasing numbers of Cas! ;
tro’s subjects are less willing now toentrust -
heir lives to che phenomenally Kittedorches- DG
Arator of mass emotions — Politically often coe
astute yel repeatedly incompetent In so many * _ ,
flelds — who has been their absolute ruler wa [
since 1039, . i: _—

— ’

Philip Bosal was American Am.
dassador to Cuba, 1959-1950, the first two
Years of Castro‘s nile. He is the auther of
“Cube, Castro, and the United States” 4
(University of Pittsburgh Press). 4

7 20). 12956)


--- Page 23 ---
14-0000

“ CALTFORNIA © :
UNIVERSITY of CALIFORNIA PRESS
- FALL BOOKS 1972

,

The Rise and Decline of Fidel Castro
Maurice Halperin

“The author of this unusual book was twice

forced out of teaching positions at American
universitics because ons political beliefs. He

spent three years on the faculty of the USSIR -

Acadeiny of Scicnecs and five years, from
1962°to 1968, at the University of Havana,
He went to Cuba in 1962 an tke invitation of

{| Che Guevara, who had visited him in Mos-
* cow, and there gathered.the materials for this.

intimate portrait of the Castro regime.

Mr, Halperin concentrates his attention on -

Castro's forcign policy, placing it i the con-

text of domestic policy and conditions. Ob-

viously skilled in reading the new socialist
thetoric, Professor Halperin guides the reader
through the maze of documents, specches,
and propaganda which constitute the record

*. of the Castro regime during the sensational
events involving Keunedy, Khrushchev, mis-

giles, and the CIA, Although the main narra
dive inconteried-withsthe years 7959-796

~ © primarily the period of the rise of Fidel Castro. *

—it contains digressions into events of the

following years when, according to'the auth-

ee!

_ new politics of mass society." -

of, Castro's great utopian dreams turned into
nightmares. A second volume, carrying the
story down to the present, is in preparation.
Maurice Halperin is Professor of Political
Science at Simon Frascr University, Van .
couver, B.C, .

“A brilliant contribution’ to the literature

* on contcinporary Cuba and perhaps even

‘more a remarkable series of insights into the

Woodrow Borah :

Oxtober LC 770383794 "ISBN wysoonbez +

“- yas pogts 6x 9°

LATIN AMEUCAN STUDUS / POUTICAL ScuNce/ HISTORY :
World £4.93 $20.95

ae! a PF SG/



--- Page 24 ---
14-0000

ais.seen t

i Ti Tay Clas Peceth
/ c WA i . BELESR
ELE erty ne
$f s eT os0sesz Jue a Clie TEL aviv’ 16247 ~392Z)00 oo
<7 DIRECTOR . baa aeoe
NO, 2796 - _ Be
© REF | RFv¥-2965 : =
— - AFTER LENGTHY HIATUS: KxCO “POUND HAS PROVIDED
A/544 DATED 24 JUN IST1 (RECEIVED 1 JULY) RE SUBJECT
REF, REPORT NOTES FOLLOWING TWO PERSONS WHO MIGHT BE
IDENTICAL WITH SUBJECT: ce
A. MCRRIS H. ALFERN | 7 Aube
@ FATHER'S WANE SOLOYON ot”.
7 BORN les, POLAND SY
© ‘pace a ae wae
HOLDER OF US PASSPORT NO. B-246607 he
Cs) VISITED ISRAEL FROM 22 HAY - 22 JUNE 6&4. 24 :
; B. MORRIS yeaa HALPERIN os nr er ee fi
© ce wen
0 1 UBATHER'S RANE HENNY . 7 j
e BOR: 1888; ; POLAND A
an : or :
HOLDER OF US PASSPORT. NO. A-1735875 ne
e. i
. ENTERED ISRazL ON 13 OCTOBER 70. fie
© | 2. REPORT ASKS FoR ADDITIONAL PERSONAL DETAILS ON > +o. -
° SUSJECT. ESPECIALLY DATE OF BIRTH AND. QUERIES IF EITHER OF
. {
e . . wt .
: SECRET _ oko

Fh Be tetas UP ce NET


--- Page 25 ---
14-0000 . . : .

on .
. - 16 gy
& EB . ~
SECRES JIX-=53066
. ~ »
24th June 1971 a:
. aN
M544 Set ag .
: : . mia eae .
ve
i Maurice Ryman HALPERIN
of > "Reference John ¥.'s siemorandum to .
: Joseph H, dated 4 November, 1969,.
L Unfortunately in your letter under reference

you did not mention Subject's date of birth. Our
inspection of Border Control lists show. that two
People have entered ISRAEL who might possibly be
‘identical with’ Subject: .

a. Morris H.. ALPERW 0 ee ee a
_,, Father's name Solomon - .
. Born 1886, POLAND . . Soy
. Holder of United States passport no. B-246607 | :
“Wieited ISRAEL from 20 May, 1964 = 22 June a

964,

bd. Morris Hyman RALPERIN

: Father's name: Henny .

ae Se : Born 2886, POLAND > | |. ce, ah

ves my | Holder of United. States passport no. A=-1735875 _

Tae . oe ' “Entered ISRAEL ‘on. 13 October; 1970.

2, °° +18 Subject identical with either of the two

- above? re ea ma

3.. Fe should. be most grateful for additional personal
“details on Subject, .~ Sot ,

SEBCA2ET.

> Cahkil Te, Ary /bryz |


--- Page 26 ---
14-0000

Caesecnstaaar Oussewnanion Sucbsiren Merseane Tora Coen
SIS

FITS SECRET Cae?
Ve tae ere
[When Billed ix? omen oe

PIARMS CRON > ee nee es

ANITA S STEN BY

=
be

- sOvance corr OT saree. DO) norts

wou, Gs O x0

ciate 19 mee ho 16 le- Hine re Ra Ao

grey TO me so
eo. :
PLE OD Beer. rm amascn TA 6 ~

DIRECTOR
oo RYBAT RNYTON
NO. 1685
REF: (v-2965 »

we
. aNy INFO THAT MIGHT BE AVAILABLE OR COULD BE OBTAINED aN ‘POSSIBLE

"RELATIVES KKCOLLIERS ANDy ASSOCIATION KXCOLLIER CULTURAL OR FINAN? s
+ CEALSUPPORT ORGANIZATIONS IN wouany, ase
"8. DIFFICULT FoR’ MIM FIND’ ‘PEG OW WHICH To HANG “APPROACH Bieta.
WITHOUT SOME KKGOLLTER’ MOTIVATION WHICH BOTH XKCONCERTHASTER AND [ von
SUBJECT RU=2365. HAVE EXHIBITED.
-SECR ET

. ak
. LO pe 2 OE a clea 2! Sean
. Tee my (ea a, 7 at eet
" rie” . Be ot Te
| SECRET | ne.

Gee hie ON


--- Page 27 ---
14-0000

+ FORM WO,

sey

of

=o OISPATCH jf eaePase aera
[_ [Wrorwarion —paxre SIGNATURE

GPO: 1088 0 - 291-5a9

ot 23 aad

ree



--- Page 28 ---
14-0000

2 . 4

CAR RN 1 PRTG ATION CT

f L. YOUN AIOE OG : _
nl ns

 urice maa HALPERIN re Ee

STs anytted ed MCT Ne

1,: It fa requosted that you take up the case of HALPERIN with
KKCOWBELL, Attached for your information and bsckground $3 some
biographic data and informotion  concorning hia activities on behalf of

Soviet Intelligence.

2. We would like you to ‘explora with KKCOWBEL L the possib{-
lity of sending one of bis officors here to debricf HALPERIN along tho
Lines of the Milton SCHWARTZ case. Tho fact that he has beon unwilling
to tell us anything and ia yet now anti-Soviet indicates that a KKCOLLIER
officer might have much better entree, Give’ KKCOWBELL aa mach of
the attached information as he seems to noed to make a decision,

. 3. ‘Subject is probably still in British Columbia at tho university -

’ montioned, but in any case tho KKCOLLIERs should be able to locate him
precisoly through Subject's son and/or daughter at the addressee piven. wae
It is known that he is quite cloas to hie children, :

4. In any event, we are intorastod in any comments or traces .
KKCONCOCTER may have concerning him,

Se John L. Hadden” :
Attact ; Chief, C1/SPG : *
_ Bio sheet, h/w . a ; ;

NEVW-2965 21 October-1969

TUSHAR AON

al

BEPA FORN AND ELONAER , 7
1

Cor
Na

MATING.

ORIG

File: Subject

OFTR2 Suet” bat . OFMCERS SORANRE

- 0 ese 7 *TpisparcH |


--- Page 29 ---
14-0000

AL, | nelucGd | Ll alent TZ at
“| kl car a ial

‘ ‘awn Ey 237. me previo editions

owe 1h [PREPARE REPLY
RECOMMENDATION

{+ SUGHATURE

[pet DISPATCH:

[__jrie
oun ——t~ INFORMATION

ete

Remarkes Atbchak aoe Oe sop tance lenny ow

ah Ze Bivsy J Mhablon § Sco AnT 2 - <A,

TR He Man Gyryatisd AMLLEMA

va snl fey He meee Gn yee
dicate & en nga dulin Seve!

oak & poanky TE en. < Atk “ait,

Meares HALKEMM Lr gectsib le envesTe tes



--- Page 30 ---
14-0000

Ls Geteber 169

SUBIECT; Maurice tyra RALPEREN: be: . .
prow: Seston, 3 Marca 1906 a Sem

a highly-sensitive,

1. The source for the following informatica is R
ivities in North

thoroughly-tested inforiant with knowledge of SES act
Anerica during the Second World Ware

chief of the
gene while he . .

ERIN

A. . Souree knew that Maurice Hyman HY
Latin American, livision of OcS.S., was a valus
was in 0.8.8. - :
B. Source knew three KGB officers who at various times during
the Second. World Wat were ‘responsible for directing HALPERIN and other 3
penetrations of the UL S. Go -Vasilij Nikhailevicn ZURELIN aka :
ZARUBIN, Soviet Vice-! al in New York City; Pavet Pante Leymonovich
KLARIN, Soviet Vice-Con 1 in New York and Stepan Zakharovich APRESYAN,
Soviet Vice-Consul in New York. fae . ; ,

s

ONS 2 Tt is known Croa several other source “Gneluding Elizabeth
BENTLEY, that HALPEREN had been involved in communist activities since
the Late 1920's and had worked for the KGB during World War li.

7 on 2 3. HALPERIN refused to tell a U.S. Senate coamittee if he had

” : been a CP membor and in 1953 he Cled from the U.S. to Mexico. In. 1958.
e i he went to the USSR and allégedly worked for the Acadeny of Science an
Moscow Universi In 1962 he left Moscow and. went to Cuba. No aidéd
Alfred Kaufinaw $ jad Martha Dodd STERN to escape from the U.S.A. to
Czechoslovakia “in 19ST. : Coe GE eo tee

yc WALPERIN'S ‘career can be divided:into the: following periods:

i .

Toe a 1931-1941. Professor at the University of Oklshoma
1941-1945 ~C.O.1. - 0.S.S. .
1945-1948 Department of ‘State
1946-1949. . American-Jewish Conference, handling minority: ©

7S 5 grotips and acting as a liaison official with, the 2
1949-1955 Boston University." - uo oo . .

- 1953+ 1958 | Mexico cot vet

19S8-1968,-  U.S.S. R. and Cuba

1963-1969. Simon Fraset University

jn Bufnaby, British “columbia.

Ss. If HALPY agreed to cooperate, he would’ be an extremely valu-
: able source on a nun t of topics, as is indicated by the outline of his
fe career... One of the most important topics, and the. one in which we are

“SRT ;


--- Page 31 ---
14-00000

*, Harper Avenue, Chicago, Illinois.

in the best position to check the validity of his information, is

that of KGB penetration of the U. S. Government, especially O.S.S8.
and the State. Department.

6. :MALPERIN Kas indicated that he is now anti-Soviet.

7. HALPERIN's son, Dr. David HALPER N, lives at 5309 South. ..

8... HALPERIN's daughter, Judith GAMORON, and his son-in-law

‘Rabbi Willol GAMORON, reside at 617 North Witcomh Drive, Palatine,
Llinois.::'- : : eo

9. .HALPERIN is quite deaf.

:
i
i
:
Q



--- Page 32 ---
hie sez / We per SYS o

SOLON INITLALS ~ SET’

wy

- . wessace reau 8 on a
. tg rerar caress “fy = nL Tr ° TT thy
gay Roberts L. Pendley/dek {| .
ut, | DC/CI/SPG.- “SECRET jt 7
on 7992 , . a - re eT |
DaTEr 7 July 1971 “a
CABLE SECRETARIAT pisseminanon +O wore ED wo ox 0 RETURN To sn BRANCH go me wo

SECRET — - “Than a 2a . “cite piacere
cen a T7797

TEL AVIV

RYBAT RHFPON

Novum i
. a
\\et

: 2 o2)
REF; TEL Aviv 16247 -¢ 7/724 ) \
: aa Kea

cone A CTIMENT TO NFVA-2965 GAVF. DPOB oF SUBJECT AS BOSTON,

3 MARCH 1908, AS. WELL AS CONSIDERABLE BIO. INFORMATION, SEEMS |

CLEAR THAT NEITHER MAN LISTED IN REF Is WENTICAL WITH SUBJECT.

2. WILL AWAIT: RECEIPT OF A/544 FOR FURTHER COMMENT.

~
.

-END OF MESSAGE

“Hess frocerk _

- . poe wil isn
‘ woe . mn . 7
8 . . s
: pf p ;
5 Lela Lite ls a
; ROBERT L, PENDUEY 2 '
; DEPUTY CHIEF, CI/SPG coornimating ornicens *
4 . [secret AUTHENTICATING
RELEASING CFFICER . - Ss = Cc RE T OFFER
coer NO,

DeRONAIT TIAN RY ATER THAN THE ISSUING CFFICE 1S PROW!GITED


--- Page 33 ---
14-0000

MOVTING ARR OE INinis + SFEN BY

Py : : DEsSAGe FORM
~ .- . “pore: cops: . iif “te 4
om ‘irch RD, O'Neal 7 ir TG \ ma,

warn C/CI/SIG FSECRET ofa
wr 6331 . ’
‘ant. 3 December 1908

OTTAWA , : Co 56296
_REYWAY WOMUSE ; a 7
REF: OCOA 13668
* -* Uy INTERPRETATION WHICH WE SHOULD PLACE ON THE LEAD PARA IN
CONTEXT OF INFO PROVIDED BY WOFIRM LEAVES us IN DOUBT. HOWEVER, NOFIRM.
POSITION FOLLOWS: ee a, oo:
, A, OUR REF TO SUBJECT AS RIS AGENT IN SUMMARY OF TRACES
(SEE PARA ONE DIR 87411) WAS BASED ON WENTLEY. BOOK. AS

a SUBSEQUENTLY ‘POINTED ouT IN PARA ONE DIR. 09956. :
, B. ALLEGATIONS IN BENTLEY BOOK AND NFO NENSPAPER ITENS aa

ARE 18 PUBLIC DOMAIN, WE, OF COURSE, HAVE NO OBJECTION To-~
: SMAROVE USING IN ANY MANNER IT CHOOSES INFO APPEARING 1
-. pupLte: PUMATN: ALTHOUGH CALLED THEIR ATTENTION BY US.
ae “AGAIN F EMPHASIZE, HOWEVER, xo WOFTRM -AtTaraurioxs AT any ¥

&

oF PROCREDINGS. ott!
c. ‘PRorosen SOLEMN DECLARATION" THAT THE OFFICER, 1S

fons O'VERITARLY | INFORMED" “SUBJECT (1) "HAS BEEN aND @2y 1B

2 CURRENTLY CONSTDERED TO BE AN AGENT OF RIS". IF USED, WE

.

*

FERL SHOULD sor BE CONSIDERED AS SPECIFICALLY AND FULLY

tnsatoe ofnce : TES Serra Fa Se S Sitenbe oY
REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE is PRoMiamrED, “°C! “EE TEES cel



--- Page 34 ---
14-00000

ROUTING AND’ OM SUTLALS = SEEM tyr

CARSEACE FORM
TOTAL COMES:

SECRET

SECRET : lett (oe!
iclastifcatron) (Cate ond time . Vererence umber}
we Be es Oo TELAT 7
SUPPORTED BY WOFIRM DATA, WE DO FULLY ACCEPT ALLEGATION.SUB- 7

JECT (1) HAS BEEN AN AGENT OF. RIS, AND HAVE NO. INFO wuIcH
WOULD INDICATE HE HAS HAD. A BREAK IN FEALTY TO SOVIETS.” _ NSVER- :

: THELESS, WE MUST ADVISE WE HAVE NO CURRENT ‘INFO FROM WHICH AD

SPECIFIC CONCLUSION COULD BE REACHED: THAT HE IS (2) "CURRENTLY"

“ ACTIVE AS AN AGENT OF RIS, SMABOVE IS BETTER QUALIFIED THAN

" WOFIRM TO COMMENT ON "CURRENT" RELATIONSHIP.'AS HE IN THEIR
JURISDICTION. ° a

arr SUGGEST INFORMAL RESPONSE TO SMABOVE CONSISTENT wiTd :

; : ~~” ABOVE, gs APPRECIATES THAT SMABOVE IS FACED WITH TOUGH PROB- OY

es LEM IN SEEKING PROPER MEANS OF RESPONDING TO MANPOWER AND ni ie ‘

Pos MIGRATION DEPT ON- MATTERS AFFECTING POSSIBLE DISCLOSURE oF

SENSITIVE SMABOVE INFO (INCLUDING INFO FROM SMABOVE. "FRIENDLY
LINKS") "HOWEVER, SMABOVE CAND siatioy) “SHOULD ‘REALIZE THIS

1s NoT ‘coop “TEST CASE” or WOFIRM ABILITY OR WILLINGNESS. TO

"RELEASE INFO In SUPPORT oF SMABOVE OBLIGATIONS ‘VIS A VIS ca

s “8
: -. NADIAN 1WITGRATION™ POLI TES AND ‘PROCEDURES “CIN: THAT OVERT t
a0 yoy : a
ar ; ___ COOADINATING OF ncERS . -
— . RELEASING OF FCTR : | SE c R E : ? i z ea rinrinad

REPROOUCT. SY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE Is ¢. OHIGITEL. OPT NO,


--- Page 35 ---
14-0000

ie oe | a. Aiuas, a
_ ATTRIBUTION Is POSSIBLE IN THIS INSTANCE), SMABOVE SHOULD
- BE AWARE THAT NORMALLY HQS WILL NOT BE ABLE ‘To MAKE ITS DEROG .

INFO AVAILABLE FOR PURPOSES OF PUBLIC USE BY IMIGRATION, DEPT.
END OF MESSAGES

“eeee
nhs
ae

A
iN

-e eee

. . \ . COORDINATING CFFICTRS
De) crete
. REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE 15 PROHISITED, .  SOPr ko.

ol - 129561


--- Page 36 ---
14-00000

erry

SECRRAT

eniof, WONUSE

Chief of Station, ottawa la: veomee
Too a Cee a I ns
88 REYWAY/SMALOVE

ice HALPERIN. (201128561).

Miu
ACTIOM REQUIALD « RUE Ls

Action: See bolow

Roferencos: A, OTTAWA 5447, 10 June 1968 __
“By “DIRECTeR 09936, 20 Juno 1968

Tho following is a a SMAROVE roquest for approval to cise minate
WOFIRM. dorogatory Anfornation concerning, Subject. & hand~:
.carriod tho request to us and made tho cornment that § WROvE hoped
“that BOFIRM would refuse tho request since tha derogatory infor=
mation could have come only from ono or two sources and SHA
‘is generally opposed to making public information that
* acquired by covert means, Although the following do
it; @ sinilar request has ‘teen font to LNERGO atid SNoF

net mention

1. “In order to acquaint you and your Agency with the reason
-for our request in paragraph G below, wo would explain that recent
changes In tho regulatioas of the Donartment of Manpower and Imni-
gration and the provisions of the Immigration Appeal Be Act have
created cortain proble=s, :

(Offteer 0."

2. “When a Special Inquiry ‘is held by an Immicrat
at’ al Canadian Port of Entry to enquire into na persons’s
Af information is available to tho SMAEOVE prohibiting
entry under the provisions 6f the Immigration Act, an 5
mation cannot bo released for security rensons, S'ASOVE required
by Immigration Regulations to tissue ‘an "Solemn Déclaratic for.use
at the Inquiry, Shovld such an Inquiry . result. untavor: ‘biy tor the
innigrant, ho. has tho right. of appeals 2 _

3. min’ issuing. the first ngolenn Declaration", in order to
provide protection for ovr sources, wo only made a dectar
. We were in: possession ‘of information mal sing tho
for entry to Canada under Section §& of tho Innigration’

the Imnigration ‘Appeal - Board has ‘since ruled that a."s
rmatiou|to enable the t: ndividoal,

g ‘to hive w Foavonnlla: oppsatunkty
of knowing the nature of the alloyations.

Loe continued -
CSratos Trae pry ait y SATE

OCOA-13668 INS Nover
CLAS caticn eos PRE erase

SECRET 201-125562

ber 1963.



--- Page 37 ---
14-0000

" Attachmont: He

we. .

CONTINUATION OF
DISPATCH
PATO

4, "Therefore, in consultation

AIUTE b Mag Am RE

Kt J OCOA-1L2668

with cur legal branch, we have

drawn up thavattached drart "Solean Declaration" Which wo feel

satisfies the conditions set out
to uso in the case of Maurice H

ry

tho Moard and which wo propase

TALPERIN, AS: you will ‘note, we'ha:

Provided information which in the Cpinton of sur leyn} branch will be
tho minimun requiréneat: if our declaration is to bo found valid,

5. "We would therefore request

that you ascertoin 1f consider-

ation can be given to have your Agency a&utherizo us to include the

information: contained. tn lines nino,

tea and cloven of the attached

draft "Solean Declaration", ° The decision of your Agency should be
mado with the understandings that tho declaration would bo avatiladle

to HALPERIN. and his counsel at both ¢t
and tho Imnigration Appeal Board Rear

. GS. "Our case against HALPERIN r
receivo approval for the use of the 1
Agency, since va have to show that HA
admission at the tino he entered Cana

inherent in a request of this nature ‘and ig after wolpning all. the
considorations your Arency finds. it dnposstbla to authorize vy

we intend to advise the Dopartment df
Wo aro unable to isso tho requi
study other way:
this naturo,"

AS Stated

‘Distribution: bo
. 3 ~ Chief, EUR w/att a
2 Chief, woNUSE w/att b/w

ho Immigration Spoctal Inquiry
ing. oo

ests on whother or not wo ..
nformation furnished by your
LPERIN was iInelisiblo for
Ca, We approctate the problens *

Mate Se law Lecte en
Cfarsionvy D. “uC eLAci Toy

! S

feature


--- Page 38 ---
14-00000

° SOLEMN DEGLAXATION _

. . -

an I, » on officer of "> SHABUVE a)

: 7 ‘ do solomnly declare, |
. (| THAT Tam voritebly inferred that

Maurice Hymon HALPERIN : ‘
born March 3, 1906 at :

oe Boston, Massachusetts, ~ 3
7 United Statos of: America, *

last roported residing at 600 Smith, Avonue, Apt. 132, i
Coquitlam, New Westminster, B.C. has bean ond is currently

considered to be ‘an agent of the. Russian. Intelligence: pM are

Sorvice. Based upon this. inforriation I belteve that -

" ‘Maurico Hyman HALFERIN ts a member of a class of por@ons
\ , described in Section 5, paragraph ‘(n) of ,the Inmigention.
Act, Chaptor 325, R.S.C. 1953. | [- ; a

“ Ynske this solemn declaration sonacientiously

: believing it to be true,. and knowing that it fe of the

, same force and effect as’ if made under oath end by

virtue of the Canada Evidence Ast.

:
=e


--- Page 39 ---
14-00000 r=}

+ t =_
. f * and forward te RID. if Gla no. and title shown are 57 ~
~ 2 Destroy front cere? sheet, unless It records” insort propor file no. bolow az: :
~“ significant action taken oF comments requir documont to FUD/AN.
t PROPER FILE me. : .
Ln | Nl we ha ee
. .
: — | i | -
~ : a
>? x “Fick NUMBER (PRIMARY CODE)
‘ TRACE g__sestnacr 77 ' :
we REQUEST | _ LINDER 4 | LO —_— jj ‘ L
CATE MICROFILMED . . COV MENT DATE DOCUMENT >.
‘ - 15 NOV 1968
a oe | Cie |

SECRET

TH $100,



--- Page 40 ---
14-0000

DISPATCH | =]

Chret, European Division

Iasaee roe ise uae

ny

Chiet, WOMUSE

or)
f of Station, Ottawa a

Action: See below

References; A, OTTAWA ‘5447, 10 June 1968
B DIRECTOR 09956, 20 June 1968 ©

WOFIRM derogatory information concerning Subject, SMABOVE/26 hand-
. carried the request to us’ and made. the conment that SMABOVE hopad -

that WOFIRM would refuse tho request Since the derogatory infor—

i acquired by covert means, Although the rollowing does not montion
i it, a similar request has been Bent to LNERGO and SMORANGE ; .

1. "In order to acquaint you and your Agency with the. reason
for our request in paragraph .6 below, we would e
- | changes...
“gration
- created

mation cannot be released for security reasons, SUAROVE is required
by Immigration Regulations’ to issue a *Solemn Declaration" for use.
at, the Inquiry, Should such an Inquiry result unfavorably for -the

- - 3. "In issuing the first. "Solemn Declaration”, in order to
provide protection for our sources, we only made’ a declaration that

1

against whom action is being taken, to have a reasonable opportunity

~ continued ~

are

opie 2 ny :
OSPATCH SIMRAN AND were SE TE
i

. CROSS REFERTACE TO
‘ : OCOA-13668

CLASSIFICATION

Paras tek
November 196

F wear

OS

SECRET



--- Page 41 ---
14-0000 .

cote

¥ an .

CONTINUATION OF | Prerrearerrrss 7
ileal SECRET ; OCOA-13668

TORPAT CH seu) AND RUT

pee cronies oe ane cel

4,0 "Therefore, in consultation with ur legal branch, we have
drawn up the attached avraft "Solemn Dec tion" which we feel
satisfies the condittons set out ty the Neard and which we propose
to use in the case of Maurice Hyman HALPERIN, AS you will note, we hav
provided tnformation which fn the opinion of our legal branch will be
the minimum requirement Lf our declaratlen is tu. be found valid,

5. "Wa would therefore request that you ascertain if consider-
ation can be given to have your Agency autiorize us to include the
information contatned in lines‘nine, ten and eleven of the attached
drat¢ "Solemn Decluration", Tho decision of your Ayency should ‘be
made with tho understandings that the doclarvation would be available
to HALPERIN and his counsel at both the Immigration Spocial Inquiry
and the Immigration Apponl Board Hearing,

6. "Our caso against HALPERIN rests on whether or: not we
receivo approval for the use of the information furnished by your

. Agency, since wo have to show that HALPERIN was ineligible for
admission at the tino he entered Cannda, We appreciate the problems

inheront;in a ‘request of this naturo and if aftor weighing all the

considerations your Agency finds it impossible to’ authorize release,
we intond to advise the Department of Manpower and Immigration that
we are unable to issue the required "Solemn Declaration" and will

study..other ways and me

ans of overcoming our problems in cases of
this nature,".""- 7 , : . toe me

aie A tes te an fe
Henry D. MC CLACKIO

"Attachment: H/W-
As Stated- ~-

‘Distribution: - ,
‘3 - Chief, BUR w/att h/w
°2 = Chief, WOMUSE w/utt h/w

se §30 Use PREVIOUS



--- Page 42 ---
14-0000

woo. DMN DASLAG ELON
= —S——

I, » an orficer of SUABOVE Be:
ray _ vee ie

a --.--~ GO Sclennly Geclare,- aa
THAT I an.waritably tnformed that

Maurice. 3 HALFOAIN
born Maren 3, 1908 st
Boston, ™ Massschusetts,
United —Ststes of america,

last. reported residins at 600 ‘Salth Avena, Apt. 131-H,
Coquitlan, New Westuinster, B.C. has been and is: currently |
considered to be an Bgent of the Russian Intelligence
i Service. . Based. upon this information. I believe that
. “Maurice Hyman MALPERTN is a mémber of a class of perscis ,
described in Section s, paragraph (n) of , the Innizration
Act, Chapter 325, 2.S.c. 1952, / ;

i , “ep:
I make this solemn declaration conscientiously -

believing it to be true, and knowing that it is of the

“same force and effect as if, made under oath and by .

virtue of ‘the Canada Evidence Sot.

' Declared before me

Q
; , — )
“this _ "day of }

)

» AD. 19

Af) a4 (~ C04 “1306


--- Page 43 ---
14-0000

bende

RETURN TO: LYNCH
DATE; 9/18/63
File @ 100-Z1511

/
NAME: HALPERIN, EDITH

NEES F FRISGV
Born: 7/6/01
indiana

INS AS 332 326 a

ats)

pee cad

th ocr. a

Bb -- SAG SES

19 SEP 1968



--- Page 44 ---
14-0000 *

enact rom (2.
retaa Comin 2)

ore James Kevleyics . ~
"yor, EBC/C SECR ETZS
er R-1L1L06 5 7
j : can. 19 June [9c -

CARE \ecrnamar DoommAnCH © seer pesror J tervew to___ aac : OC] mano

. - : oe 9:9
SECRET ae OS95¢
op 202 2h ' 4 =
 Grrawa eS —
KEXWAY WOMUSE
REF: A, OTTAWA 5447 (IN 27838)
nies -
B, DIRECTOR 87411,
. . Ae
1, CONCUR PASSAGE PARA ONE REF B INFO AS PROPOSED REF A, BASIS
FOR "RIS AGENT" IDENTIFICATION IS INFO FROM ELIZABETH BENTLEY AS. |)”
REFLECTED IN HER BOOK “OUT OF BONDAGE," THE DEVIN-ADAIN COMPANY,”
NEW YORK 195I, PAGES 200, 210, 261 AND 263 THROUGH 266.
2 EMPHASIZE NO WOFIRM ATTRIBUTION, . , Cs ee
*+ 3, FYL.. LAUCHLIN CURRIE REFERRED TO ON PAGES 172 AND 263, Se ae
: END OF MESSAGE
. .
*
: .
a
2



--- Page 45 ---
14-0000

Fray

ov.

osteo ¥- is <<

‘

ee raniay Dee AUNATION met ANSE MEAG E

Sanco SECRET) was

[ CW ree Fitleonttey) 24

CLASBIFy TO PILE NO

ar
amr TO PLE NO

mine mo Cl] eer 10

ie

ee EET BP _ “ery
SECRET 1OL415Z due 6S" CITE. OTTAWA aat ;

v
a
AG

vo
7

_OF HALPERIN S BACKGROUND AND. “WATERED_ AT_DOWN" TO SET AIM

a] :
Po SITION. ?

NFO

rn

tlt [oS al

Orta:
DIRECTOR INFO JNWAVE

TYPIC

REF’ DIRECTOR 87411.

Shae PER RELIABLE AND DELICATE SMABOVE SOUNCE, MAURICE”
nn, i.

HALPERIN (2517 128561), HAS SEEN VIRTUALLY ASSURED: AN

o_o board

APPOINTMENT AT simon FRASER UNIVERSITY, VANCOUVER » -
re ore OSH

LAUCHLIN BERNARD CURRIE (2COA- 12472 WV LOBAIED VERY: HARD

Maver “tore jay scl
TO HAVE gHALPERIN ACCEPTED” BY--UMIVERS LEY-«:~- CURR TE--WAS~ RYARES + mom
~~ To .

- SHABOVE Wout LIKE To BLOCK HALPERIN PER MANERT

APMISSION To CANADA AND- REQUESTS PERMISSION TO PASS DEROG

INFO IN PARA ONE oF REF TO DEPARTMENT OF MANPOWER AND

RATION AND PRIVY. cousciL- OFFICE. WOR IRN. WOULD NOT

amen AS SOURCE...” PiLS ADVISE. _

se TAKE, NO ACTION WHICH HIGHT compRow ISE source oF:

PARA ONE. ABOVE. . .
MICROFILMED

SECRET : ; 4

SUL 26 968

| BT

z

ODOC. MICRO. SER.

roo . . . -_
: 60 fear ov

a ; Deresaescl”

SECRET a3 ey mos

Sty



--- Page 46 ---
14-0000

as Megeaae,

SECRET
Het by *

at

- 4 :
wate ro re ———————
- 4
samo Caer 1 : sci ¥ .

os
ACTION, f eee

& w ) a Giles Glitz ae
aR EE a a 805 .

Ty

Panis IxFo so
KEYWAY. PRUE

eUS CITiidd

° FROM HAVA = PLY 94S. Flease PAS [sro

LNZHGO.

“
, perc dasee L
SECRET = te 4


--- Page 47 ---
14.0000

Dry auaniony Crasher ey Maiysaen

$_CRET

. | i When brited bal

eT

BAe? TO FILE NO

ar z

or

orsteor C a3

nemo Caer to

resem or JG nen

ALTON

arncn

SECRET 2412472 aPa os Sie MA RID ATS : —
DIRECTOR INFO JiMWAVE
TYPIC WATCHLIST
MAURICE HALPERIN. PP-USA-TIT-37 ARRIVED)
_ FROM HAVA 21 APRIL IBERIA FLT 942,
SECRET. 7

7 aT

SECRET


--- Page 48 ---
14-00000

° Loe Bact ee

CO more 07 perrecr 0 errvew to tac CY ore ma
! _ -

Cp omrecsmrwo. — 201-128561;.

x bid cor fo, ee a _ve i p 14 EuRx. 4 ‘éz) -

asd

.. anon a - - -
- L LS ; = LC rae z. f aur» (Cr a
. he saatewthon? i (Gare ond ned nied) Waites nyenber)
a SECRET: ivi
ro of OTTARA Cc 7 7

REF: OTTAWA~5310 (IN 77494)" (i
1, FOLLOWING SUMMARY HQS TRACES SUBJ REF:

. : , nPIC 7 a . ms eae rst | a a

Bo 7 SMAURICE HYMAN HALPERIN DPOB: 3 NAR 06 BOSTON, MASS. | «:--.
WM qssearesl nis acest, Bertperd 698 46h $B cr austrts 100s
7 ae Phonk pe hefiyrypitst] Lave 1953 supy LEFT US FOR MEXICO IN

‘ ORDER TO AVOID TESTIFYING BEFORE Us SENATE INTERNAL | SUB- col

IN 1958 MEXICAN” GOVT BEGAN DEPORTING US COMMUNISTS AND SUBJ WE)

USSR’ as VISITING PROF UNDER USSR ACADEMY OF SCIENCES. MOVED
_ CUBA ocT 62 AS PROF ‘OF, ECONOMICS HAVANA UNIV, SUBJ TRAVELLED

"PRON CUBA TO CANADA 1964 AND AGAIN LATE 1966, : a
: 2, HQS FILES, CONTAIN: ‘VOLUMINOUS LNERGO REPORTING ON SUBJ: :

. NHICH ASSUME THSY WILL PROVIDE.
3. POUCHING COPIES NEWSPAPER, ARTICLES PROVIDING GOOD *

BACKGROUND DATA,» Ce ae Be L

. . for Ls f
END: OF MESSAGE D+ fate eee!
ch 671 44k ETS aa

ae : RE CONTINUED
_ ny

ae eee
7 mee

COORDINATING OFnCERS

RILLASLAG CFRcEt | | SEGRE? ) Sears AUTHENTICATING
REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE IS PROHIBITED, cory xe,



--- Page 49 ---
14-00000

an

parte

Ane

cell

oe

Tisuheariony

SECRET |

wit/coG cou MENT:

RELEASING OFFER |

REPRODUC

Ac7eyk/ec

N.

*Requested derog traces on Maurice Hyman
HALPERIN,

Se

Cc

CorDNATEG ORNCEES

ee | Feared a een |
SECRET |. j baleded ron getenate

. EO CATING
i Pinel 0 ane aeroricet
OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFIC. PF. ISITED. COPY NO.

a



--- Page 50 ---
14-00000

ey we “ - .
eel Messige Tatas Comes 6¢( an _xovor manais-sren oy

Classy MO Ps NO
a "

AAREP TO PE ND

ose oy rea 2

ETON

wolfe 06

oue mo Gtser 19 : waancnD) ovsteoy Osc.

. SecReET a5asi3zHna’ 63. CITE NWPFTY 313.

$

"DIRECTOR INFQ JOVAVE
TYPIC WATS IS = oN .

~ | OSENSKT PSE SNABOVE SOURCE SAYS"

4 auf oF of uviveasrty or wévfica 1s fereREsTED 18 OBTAINING

aR MAURL ce

ROFESS

~~ Teacnrs POSITION IN CANADA, PER SOLRCE, SUBJ 1S ABOUT

. 6u fears ac, 28 1GINALLY- FROM U.S., AND FORMER MEMBERROSS YY,
agree Eads IDGHT CAL writ BAYES waar WASSER

2.) SUB-Esco-4 ($35,955-) 255 548

Bart 3 HARCH 08,18 BOSTON, 5 SUSPECTED. SOVIET acest.

“3, REQUEST SUMMARY DEROG W OF IR TRACES FOR StIABOVE.

“LIEK SO ALSO BEING QUER TeD.

fet s

. ‘uat :

SECRET



--- Page 51 ---
14-00000

SECHET Neen

7 ; hort

ote a GT

va 25; Nat, vet:
» Universidad De Ta Habasa,
Sitend De Planet y “Dé

No. 4, 1964.

AT en,
SECRE! Gur-12evel © . oo a



--- Page 52 ---
14-0000

| ECRET :
” - . ony an HEE MY _ be

7 ___= __ ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET

“PRIOR TO FILING. _~

ee Fe
trent cover sheet, unless at records ; .
ant actcn taken or comments requit- socument ly RIDSAN,
ing preservation .

no. and ttle shown are not proper,
mse! proper file no. below and forward

PaSEe ONO

TO: ALL ADDRESSFES
FILL IN SECTION 1 ON RACK IF APPROPRIATE
COMMENTS

DATE . ornicreas
perry
a

Roc

NO. feeceneo | roresecta

i | .
* t FETT
T ; H RE WCE
: i H i
i : ! Pas
a. 7 TRE NUMBER RIUEaT CODE
j j aesreacr t . a
i .
: foi 7 sea i pe
TT SMG MED BOCuMeN? Cate TOOCUMENT NUMBERS

patea li33e

Ca)



--- Page 53 ---
14-0000

PROCESSING ACTON

\ : '
\ .
BXEOLE .
aished the foli
' : Cé, Nourtce
: :
H . :
to hey wouid re
vai rife sre Amer
j itea States.
i :

ie foregoing
parposes, provid:

YD, tite irene



--- Page 54 ---
14-0000

EX - 786
5 Deceinber 1966

" MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

cent yn

eo SUBJECT: “American Defector to the USSR"

5 Looe 1, The attached material was part of a soft file entitled

: "American Defectots to the USSR", which was act up by SR/6
(Support) around 1960 and mainte ined by various SR components
until ca, 1963, The compilations were derived from a varicty ~ oa
of sources, and contain both classified and overt data, _

2, Inthe falt of 1966, the files were turned over to CI
Staff... In most instances, basic information was then abstracted ©
fox the US Defector Machine Program, In all instances in which’
the material was unigue, or represented a valuable collation effort,
_it has been incorporated into the appropriate 201 file, along with.
a copy of this memorandum,

: 3. Itis suggested that any dissemination of this data should”
be coordinated with SB Division and with CI Staff (CI/MRQ), in

1
1
_ i . _ view of the fecquently inadequate sourcing and of the fact that _

Pe out disséminations have already been made through the us Defecto wos

; as . Machine Program, . t ~ :

r : ; .
po hte os

! vt . : : So, JuBeniter | : . 4

Orig - CI/MRO Oe De, rr

1- RID/FI

1- SB/RMO-

1- CI/R&A/IJLBerder
1- CI/R&A/chrono

‘, : bite , Ars :
: CSf ILE? ie

_ 57 Daw. ZZ
SECRET 2Of- 126 561



--- Page 55 ---
ey

oe ASEAN a TAI

_ stated Tet whe

* gacob CCLOS, according to ner IShS. testixory. icH/en, oO, SAS)
> tinory. ;

. oy Be OSS in warti

_ Xow Y Communist activities anj ¢

“10, attached), According ts 31

A Fa 2244

*

mS

‘

2931, Already a Sarvand: praczate and com -y be becare a prefessor

at CkTahoma Gniversity. (QO files)

He mide a tort: de tt-wincers were
i expelled, Dur ; t direct comanist
@ ace aasctri na xia: saxireres srecdeneithcnecniee

ican commmnist leaders, (ON les)

ee

pau
arrestec
acti vities in Vxlahora xv
any trips te Merico to confers with >

“190s Ke cashed a check gran on the Sank of foreign Trade, Moscow.

“}this was not Gisceveres. until ks see next iter? (ee files) —

ign. Congressional investigation ef emer subversive activities: in Ukla- :
i ~elsicn fron Cribs
> imblications, ”

-association with leftist in et
embersiiip in leftevin:

while on sabbatical. Reine
te would resign at bernihation of

in “standing
sapbatical, (25, Herman Horton exo)

" 9h2. Late in the year, Slizabeth Sentley was tbod: ced to hia a

keg for CSS .in kashincten Dec., Ge:
gathies, He was (or becane befor :
Azerican Division, (Washington Post, 1 Sept’
beth Sentler's testisony and Boek (ct
ef Bondage"), he surplied Geles and he conse. St epoarat with information’
fron his 085 office, SIG,SRS) oe :

1983, As of this time ke

of the war) head of the USS Lat:

1943, Slisateth 3 atley tes ifted that sha Asset Ris-dn late isle
throvelJacod Coles (knows Soviet arent) and that while Halperin was ‘employed
cashington he gaw information te Golos. (Sta :

“kvturn AghS. Ke began: tetehing at Féston University. (sks, Perton ‘eme),

y this ttre ho’ Was diveeter. of Latin Anerican :
versity. Ee-was simnoned to testify before ‘the
wea Sentley had nasa’ hin as one of her sources.
he was’ a commnist. (GC Nles)

' ‘Late 1952 or early 1983, By

med by certain’ =
fttee uv

Later in 153. Re was s
With an lnsartial 3
tine being. (OX files)

o8 Novenber 1993, The

€ Janery 19S, He was fomnally cississed from 3.0. She,
ne
TEN on tne casa of



--- Page 56 ---
14oaaae

Ain

le anaes,

n

“ Halperin was very
y plans = he cot
perms until the

. Af 9s°3ef ~

Later in 1997 or the ftrstinlt of 1e%8. Public disclosuie of his role
in the Stern affair’ caused htm and Wis wite (Edith nee Frisch) to lose their
Jods. She was a teacher at the American Uchool Foundation, while he worked
in a Mexican vovernient bank and at .the Moxico University Rational School of

Political an¢ Social Sctences. (S83, Horton reno)

their phane reservatiors +

last mime, ete. (Cho; riv l Sept 60)

‘1958, They applied for US passvorts at the American Enbassy in
chs, Horton memo} sa ee

26 he
Nexico city.

. | 26 aupust 1958, Their. passportts vero issued. (SK2, Norton memo). This
followed a ST Sonrene Courtedecision that the State Denartment could-not

- dery a passport because of commnist or other political beliefs, (wash Post,
1 Sept 60) § : - :

Loe 28 Soptenber 1958. Their nassports were visaed by the Mexican authorities:
“" "to travel in Mextco In the status of imniprants," valid tilt 25 Sept-59. (SRS,
Der-s66L.. “By thts tine the Kexican Governxent had begun devorting US commn-

~ dsts. (SRS, Horton memo) . .

ico. (Horton meno aid fiash Tost, USep &)

ti, DBF-56612)

13 Cetober 1958, Thay departed

Sow Novenber 1958. They arrived in Czechoslovakia.

_ 3 Becember 1958, They arrived in the USSR on tovrist visas to firm up
tentative job. offer (the Soviets wouldn't commit themselves before he actually -.
W inUSSR.) Job was visiting professer uncer Social Sciences Tiivision of USSR

, Academy of Sciences, on contract till July 1961; no teaching, but research and
-7 handling studént theses. Salary unfavorable since in mbles, but he hoped to
compensate by getting exserience and material for book; also use rubles for ~
grand tour of USSR before departure. (CI/SIG and SRS, DS¥-56611) ©. -"

_.,..33 December 1958. They in Hoscow as of this: date but must have gone to. .
‘ Leningrad soon after, since he said his. job wag there at first. ‘hey moved to _
“ | Noscow some time before duly 1960. °(SRS, DBF-56611) . fo

j 1s_Awly 1960. He and wife apneared at the American ubassy Hoscow to
{renew their passports, lio excuse for not having reported in-earlier, The

(T Rutuzovssi Prospekt 13, apt 127, HMoscow. Halperin gave them the job infornie

— Qcteder 1960, The American Snbassy reqvested that he apnear for an inter-
view adout just what His job was, He wrote on 30 Yctober sayim that they
: . were just lesving on vacation and swearing that his job was not in conflict.
. with his US citizenship. 4 certain Nax berger (not further identified | re=
ported that lalosrin was cettine hipher-than-usval salary on his passsort.
should be revoked. (SKS, D3A-1753, 6 February 1962)



--- Page 57 ---
14-00000

~~ SECRET

. . . . ote

ified Ceviet arent vho left
en," was te be head of one of .
om Counted during a Mescew cenference of communist *~
rmamnt strdies ani cooperstion with Latin American

3ed byt @ Communist Parties of Arce: itina, brazil, and:

ag his pre: ly mver happened.) (< SRS,

> 13 Jamar 1961, info HoveDec G0, trea an official Swedish
service ren ust aliy-7 eliable source who Polish esfietal with nich-level

contacts) ~

: . As of Februar’ 1961, Ye was ranorted ag a US national lecturing: in

: - éconontés Helped gather data for Che Gr ‘evarals Punta del Este
vo Speech. - ioerin's son in US was planning visit “then in G1 but canceled
to:their rreat disanpointnent. Halperin seened to recret” having fone to the
_USSR and sic on several cecasions he would like te return to the 5; always
“*4goxing® abort the Dleasant aspects of life in tha SQ’. Had teen offered
Jod in Guba and was tr vine Gecide wether acce: Sy CUCL 3/772 59,

“7 Sect LSE, f wen n reftgee who was Economic Vourrelor at Cuban Bubassy

“ly aan Their passports would have expired, requiring issuance of

new ones. (Unly passserts actually issued - not renewed - after Septerber

* 1959 had the w threesvear validity instead of thy old two-year validity,

according ta Ventral Frocessizr nee) We have no recerd of xeissiue of new ones ,
“but it seems to have been dene, because at the and of 1962 Halperin spoke of

* keeping his US citisenship after moving to Cuda. -

vot 2 Oetever 1962, They moved to°Cuba, He was als eady working in a textile
/ factory am sovid Start teaching at Havandiniversity on 3 October. (SRS; copy
of a glad-to-be-back,: nro: ban proparanda-like agtter personal Ictter. written
by Halperin). They sot a big weléome in Cuba becavse they came from Moscow,
but it soon-wore off-and the Cubans considered hia sold wre | Pedaiitde, (sas,
DEA-62054, B January: 1964)" . .

“Ly 21 van cr 22 damary 1963, Etisabeth Mora (long-time cosuunist) returned to” viexico
fron a wonen's congress, in Havana, wiere stie had seen the Aalperins. They
had. a mansion and servants because of his “innor tant. Job, "but he had aged”
creatly, leaked old, had to do without such am nities as underyear and socks,
“was Taticnad to one tvbe of toothpaste every, six nonths, etc. Wife said it
was Soviet treatment that had troken hin, not- Cuban, They. intended to .stay
Bt Cuba becavse. of the triendlier climate and his -feeli re usefvl there.
She wanted‘to econ: a Cuban citizen so that she eorld her son and his
, “fan ily ‘in Sexico, but he planned to keep his US citizensiiip, (SHS, PEA-31390,
, 2% Feb 63) . _

+ 1? one 1363, ‘Date of VIB. 3538, IN 62623,3 a VISN cise officer, JO; AMES;
fin touch naiserin who in Vienna writing a boox on the Castro impact on
/ South Ave Joanness rated hin "sound non—comuais t leftist whbhout party

ties or extreaist dopratisn” -? (SRS)

- on October or November 19€3; Published article about danare to Cuba frou
— J} hurricane sflora in -eteber. te reportedly. an eccnorist. employed by U:ban
Sovernnert. (S3S, DR-S2084, 13 Jan 64)

SECRET



--- Page 58 ---
14-00000

1

Cn tris date, accordine to INT article of
he called on for renewal of his MCAD Hassporte
of article 415 in with Kn 2 Mitchel] matertal tn fay Gr:
Keneval was apsarently bir 1 del p becarse of re
within the US Govt to deny 2 ssports to comme sy: pathizerd.

LG fupy

a

at tens:
attemsts

40, The sane IST article reported just above gaid that he
led a State Uepertment vepert. thet he was working as an
advisor to Sov Govt on Latin american affaires—-Said he vas prefessor
associa ted A Academy of Sciences, vriting book on Latin Ancrican cconoxy
WhS-83,- "There is nothing. -wstertous or dubious about my bet, in - ae
Since, my arrival I have filed two US income tax returns, listing ny salary
_ and anployer, I: am not working for the Soviet, Jo
-was whon he performed ina Gov t-ouned concert hall.
- the USSR AS and not the first American to be assuciated with, ite

ment, and my Soviet visa espire in. Jely 1961." -

had jus

any more than Van Clibura
Daa a visiting profin |.
fy aspeinte 9 0 *

e


--- Page 59 ---
wees Over One ue {s .
Z¢

chatter to Fie nO. “ELLSSTFAED HESSASE yore comics

Mer TO FILE Ne. SECRET

vice iol) wer. to oe
Cuahderenee worsted

ACVANCE COPY

Cis

SECRET 2215252 CITE OTTAVA 3695

- -OIRECTOR y a : ;
ce De STYPIC WATCHLIST = i
HALPERIN, DPOS 3 MARCH 96 IN BOSTON, AND WIFE, EDITH

Bab. MAUBICE

2ISOCH IEE FRISCH, 9PO3 6 JULY O3 IN WABASH, rina, APRIVED

MONTPEAL™S JULY ON CUSAN SHIP FRUCUSA, PLANNED STAY MONTREAL SIX WEEKS:
——— :
FOR VISIT WITH U.S, RELATIVES, . SEE OCOA-11071." “

. Qe WILL SEND SNABOVE COVERAGE OF VISIT, IF ANY.

.SECRET

RDI.
Qe) —_ j29S5G (
Ba dag C6
Date V20 SOI

*
>
4


--- Page 60 ---
14-00000

. “, - . : ~
C] UNCLASSIFIED =) YMA O corr TAL C7 secret
: ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET

SUBJECT, (Opnonat)

FROM,

3 pew Le

i]
_; .CFPCRES | COMMENTS [Number each commew te vhow oe eto
ALS [ © whom. Draw a fine econ cohen fw acct comment}

TO: (Officer: designation, room number, ond
building) eran

t.Ann Egerter
CI/SIG 2B14.-

, > 2 CI/Linison ooo
a Cre oe) 2

2p46 |. |
c 35": |

13. . _ . |
‘ ms

|

3 JUN "Se
orn SECRET CONFIDENTIAL INTERNAL * UNCLASSIFIED
USE ONLY ”

T nreson [xo _ 7. a ;
a ESEl- FILA TLE ee

poe awh Mere, we

eet. ee

he


--- Page 61 ---
j+c0000

To an Director : Cowes te
Federsl Burenu of Investigation
Attention: Mr. S. J. Pspich

FROM >; Deputy Director for. Plans ;
SUBJECT’ =: CHaurice Hyman HALPERIN and wife Beith Evelyn (nee FRISCH)

REFPRENCES: A. Mearocndum, cated 18 Junusry 1865, ; ;
. Subject: Msurice HALPERIN; kéith Erisoch H.LPERIN

B. Report of Darrel B. CUREIE, Boeton, Masanchusette, -
-.- Titles Beith Bvelyn A'LPERIN, dated 28 March 1966;
~ Field Office File 1990-31776; Bureau Pile 100-424154

.., “This Agency renuests permission to discuss the contenis of .
reference memworandun and report with the Royal Con. dian Mounted : :
Police (RCMP) to elicit from th: RCKP {nformation concerning the.
BALPERINS' Visit to E.ntresl, Canna: in ‘ugust~September 1664. 66 7 OT
This Agency ‘is particulerly foterested in the BALPERINS' where-
ebouts and activities from 18 iugust to 26 September. 1664 and :

“the ‘possibility of their having been in Contact with Canadian 5

- Communists at that time. oe a . Soe

1

_ CSCI 316/02762+66 .

> pistributtea: ; |
Original and 1 — FBI i :
se / 4 ~ CI/SIG a :
. an 1 - 5 on. .
o Shek I
: “1-- ay
oe ~ ot
to Be {
- DDP-E/BC/Canada-RNJoyner: rnj tod

cite sn eee Ramtec erent

i
i
i


--- Page 62 ---
14-00000

DOCLENT OENTIFICATION

ee ea Te
ia a el

10. Deaatwreavea im

, . BOCUMENT DISPOSITION

wi Seons aUetence To tre Fie

SUB IECT OF COCKMENT

; HALPERIN, MAURICE

‘ 201-1 2856 201-000212
a 0. 1 Sex-m 008? | . Ex -00816
Tre Ji OY MAR 86
Cit USA eg
occ? :
€ USA : .
NAHE MENTIONED. IN Ci-STUDY ON NICOLAS KAGAN
7201-000212/. SEE INDEX FOR PAGE NUMBER.

|
A

A e707astgiT.

soar 887

SECRET

}
;
:


--- Page 63 ---
J-co000

g REPODIR. 52321 7 os 7 Pode Be

Lee ete

. aaa ROUTING
— ah \ eee Ws ss

. z i
TO: olrector : . Ls

FROM; ROME ; _ pf gt y if
ACTION: WE 6

ECRET agisaiz.

Aw “4 a .
SIR INFO PARI BERN GNVA MADR MAGU CITE R mE a2
kervay PRRUMEN LOMAYFOWE .

TF ANY INDICATION SusJ REF

coNINs ITALY REQUEST “FULL DETAILS
THIS. CASES _ eee

SECRER on © oon rt ;

ste | HYMAN
was : WARE FNU' HALPERIN ts’ 10/¥ MAURICE,

es com “rege asa Naat. ia LGHAYFAWL” PENETRATION-KUTWNe

é. : é \ x
\ .
& ee

Glee gor- 138867

GROUP

x! O FR TOMATIC DOWN= :
ERR YRE AND DEEL AS S FeO t et ‘

REPRODUCTION sy OTHER TANT THE | ISSUING OFFICE IS PROHISITED.

Copy No.



--- Page 64 ---
2

a)

To
FROM: DIRECTOR

CONF: Sag 8 , Coe Do

INFO: DOP, C1, Ci/aPs, Ci/Oa, [CL/SI, FI, Ri fare
WH 7, RF so”

‘TO HAGU (PRY) "N°. PARI, BERN, GNY, a
; “ROME (RouTiNE) | .

EITM Pacoem Ledivrom!

REF: a, pacu-a1s6 (IN-~71802)
B. BHAGU-4038. (IN-62856) q

i+ PRESUME HAGE AWARE THAT (.

1S ID/W MAURICE HYMAN HALPERIN (203
_ LCMAYPOWL oheEX PENETRATION KUTHIN.

EDDIE BURSZTYN (201-170429) Us NATIONAL AND ATDE To CHE GUEVARA, = -

> GEM, WES, seg,

GNVA, MADR, - CITE DIE 5 _

i. TO INFO ADDRESSES) .
SNU) HALPERIN OF REF B PARA 6,8,
7128561) KNOW RGB AGENT INVOLVED

FROM WOSCOW CA SPRING 1961 AFTER RECEIVING JOB OFFER ‘FROM FAURE
ACHONON) MEDIAVILLA (201-270370) ‘THEN CUBAN AMS. TO MOSCOW. HALPERIN

BOORSTEIN IS: SUSPECT KGB AGENT AND’ OF CURRENT INTEREST opmiWy, <

4. IN LIGHT Fact as OF MAR 61 ODENVY HAD ESPIONAGE CASE

COTRIINATING OF

eLeasing cornice J-/7 SCR

Ficess



--- Page 65 ---
14-0000

ier

RCUNNG
3 INGEN
5 NO INDEX SE

O FRE IN C$ FILE NO.

FROM: DIRECTOR
CONF)

INFO’:

rr CITE DIR

RUNNING

AGAINST SUBJ, SUGGEST HAGD Bay WISH BRIEF LEGAL ATTACHE
BONN OR PARI ON DEVELOPHENTS TO DATE AND FOSSIBLY TURN OVER TO
. 7 LEGAL ATT FURTHER FOLLOW-UP, PARTICULARLY IP SUBJ Gozs SUISSE,

END OF BESSAGE

C/SAS/50B
C/C1/SIG ~~
qrcrmera = =F

Cr/ors, os Tay Lots

a i, eyens/ee. Wibe _ _—

Kt K tienen - :
Desmond Fitsgevald
— Chief, Sas :

ong AuTNENTICATENS
rey _ + OFFICER R

PREPRODUCTION ay” OFHER THAN THE iSSUNe OFFIGE 1S PROHIBITED, Cony.No. ik



--- Page 66 ---
4-00090

bee “ CLASSIFIED MESSAGE : pe
: 7 oB ‘ - - “"ROULING..

reine
iu +) piscerer
FROM. ¢ ViENNA .
ACTION: cafok Ly
INFO: DOP, CA 2, CA/PEG, C1,¢l/oPs, cific 2, ci/oa, ££ 4, sas 8, s/c 2

eth tener me =e

Ss Rene eet ane Iwate cae

SECRET 1716842

oN INS 1622
DIR INFO BERN CITE VIEN 3538 : , ‘INS ve

a

_ bTsortc anes

yaad

VIEN OFFICERS “IwcLup Inc JO ANE!

FIN CONTACT HALPER IN«//REGARDED ©

R EXTREMIST

“aE

AS SOUND _NON-COMMUNIST LEFTIST WITHOUT PARTY

: _DOGHAT ISH. SUBJ WHILE IN-VIEN WAS WRITING BOOK oN CASTRO IMPACT

"ON ‘SOUTH “angaica. ALSO TOLD JOANESS” ABOUT Visit To HUNGARY / oo a

1962 AND UNSUCCESSFUL EFFORTS OBTAIN INTERVIEW NOEL FIELD. * SUBS...”

OPEN ‘AND FRANK IN HIs DISCUSSIONS. No NEW INFORMATION VIEN FILES

SE RET

GRADING AND- MEEUASWIF CATION.
REPROOUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE IS PROHIBITEO , Copy No.


--- Page 67 ---
food

CLASS ATI,

SECRET :

[ mape4> sce ADC

tO : —*
Chief of Station, Mextco City
po :
Thome -
Chief, WH Divistcn
' SUBJECT “

7 Maurice Hyman Ialperin
_——" ee ee
ACTION REQUHILD . RU TRONCEB

“1. Attached is a copy of DBA 34398, dated 26 February
1063, concerning Maurice Halperin and his activity in Cuba,

2. The Station’s attention 1s drawn to page two which
states that Subject's wife hopes to obtain Cuban citizenship
So that she can come to Mexico to see her son and ‘grandchildren,
On the sane page, there is an interesting, yet vague, reference
. to his treatment in the USSA. .

. 3. Headquarters ig atill most interested in Subject, .
and the Station should be alert to any information it can gather
on HALPERIN, or on his wife's travel to Mexico, which might
be used for KUDESX or KUWOLF Purposes. .

’ “END -OF DISPATCH’

Distribution: oo '
‘0&1 - COS, Mexico City, W/Att _ ee oo te he

Pol 126561 “
‘DATE TYPED {| oare ospatenea

“18 Apri} 63. 2 APR 1963 eo

inoiw-11472
PEADQORTERS FE MOSER

“He .201-128361

yy TYEST

8S ds

Bust

RID/ay H a “[[ ence sree



--- Page 68 ---
1-000

” the. pariod: Ostober 1!
"a CIA-eoures “in Kosoow. that

TT: Director. - ;
Federal Bireay of Iavestization

Attention: Mr. 3. Je bapdeh

Fads Deputy Mtrector (lane)

i
i
SUBSET EO Maurice Hysan HALPER ae .
i

oy Raference is. rade. to our cve1-3/ 772 SPs, aubjests scontact with DeSe. :
Dofocters Abroad," dated 13 Septenber 198,"
reported that ‘at -eonetina

a Sub-psragraph 0) of referenced CSCI yor :,
Fotrary 196)-Mauriee Hall sEDi hed itated pers tings’ ; to .
he would: Like ‘to cams back to tho: :
aaked the sources Lf he should accept’ 8 praition | in Cubs .
erfered ty Fauro CH@RE.7 ——

3. This offics haa rooalved tho following additional repert concorning
BALPSADY fro the C1A offico which contributed tho original Foport;s

a. "On 27 December 1962 another source of this offices adviood that
ho received & 1962 Christmas card from Maurics lialpordin on which the
_ return addees. was. given 39 Apt C=2, Calle 12, no 103, Kiranar, Histandy. .
Cuba. * The only mecoage on the oard waa one of Christmas Ange - coe
Sears Fey serene Or oS, og
thay -abays exchange Christmas ‘gants, but this is the first tine
Halperia'e grésting has borne & Cuban addres.”

— , eteo lot theo tint the eouree ene faljerin ie in-Medibe whim colts
‘wa Vieiting in tho USS airing sugset—Bortenber 1961 a8 a mentor of tn :
-effleial U. S. dologition.” .

Arter no record af tho ain roti aa i tneltaiss _

tiles of this oeties, . lo ; .
CSCI TTEA1TO | : .
oor Doprty: Asad stant: ‘sooretery: for’ seourtty
Dopartaont of ‘State
crn
Rees

5 COPY



--- Page 69 ---
14-0000

™ ne

BO CSCI=3/774 170
: : SR/CI/DML 3 January 1
: >) Source: WH=729° (00a S87 3 3,286, 933 from core
Distribution: orig «} - addressee . oo
- State , st

. ~ CI/iSN
Le ee i CT/REA
dy 1 = CI/0G/ss :
oe oo, : l - TFW/Cl, Attn: Lois Predertckeon, Gi-5509
\- . ° 1 - SRI chrono
Gio: . , “2 - RID/AN’ for 201-128561.
er so ek £Cémeback |
Os Sons Coordinated with: TRU/cr

en Oro
hoe 3 Gon oo

RoI 1 2B Sbi- -


--- Page 70 ---
14-0000

a 7
in Moacov when he (tho foruer) was visittag th the USER |
. Septeaber

Le ES EM BL TITY FRO

.

Subject; Current ‘Addresa of Hmurice Halperia

:

wrist: Tats is the first one Halperin.
: Jlnst tims’ that our source: saw

|

1961 69. part of an official Us agiagation.

6 past activities and igsoctations,, we ere:
r there is some ecort of activity going-on.

2 : Ten ee



--- Page 71 ---
14-0000

oa oy. 3 — .
} a ey SECRET. ona

iT Fit ded tay

SNO'ICs OF vocuweNr

- YA P. a we
| —2ot- 128 64 } . 201-0052 ie

SEX DOE Fe -Rolcoose3e
: Joleen ee he oct 62):

Se ec 7) Pro.

occ 7

LETTER DATED 2 oct €2 FROM SuBy APT,

CALLE 12, NO, 103 MIRAMAR, HAVANA . To.. ~

MARGARET” MALTZ. ;

222222222222292 22722 |
eELELLLISIETETESS ESS EY
CPRM EU ELIT Cree rye rey}
ASSSSSSSS ESS esesTsas ss" -
; ee Seebesenscsesecece.oa
De ce ae OU aaa IVTVIVTTVINTVTGD
qlen - . Oo ; Crevvensazenazaaenias

ii

SECRET wi : _ . trem b



--- Page 72 ---
14-00000

. TTT
ORG: My Patteww': -
UNIT: WH/3/Mexico SECRET
fxr: 5940 : \
bate 15 Oct 1962 1562

To

“Ri se ine eupy. ae indrented,

From: QRRXRK CENTRAL INTELLIGERCE, AGENG Yea

+ RE Indeaing: ieheek Cr
cone; WH 8 . Marked

Banat: 27 2 TGs

INF: C1j=C1/OrS, s/¢.2 _ Fe

: i _ OUTB7268 __

10 : INFO. . _ CITE Dia AZ 1399/
SUBJECT: MATRICE AND DAVID HALPERIN. ; inAeeee

lh _ ACCORDING TOA _PSUALLY, RELIABLE SOURCE, ON 2 OCTOBER 1962 . ; .
MAURICE HALPERIN WROTE MARGARET AND ALBERT MALT2, GIVING AIS eG
--. UNEW ADDRESS AS Apr’ C=2, CALLE 12, NO. 103, MIRAMAR, HABANA,

HE WAS WORKING IN A TEXTILE FACTORY BUT PLANNED TO TEACH AT
THE UNIVERSITY oF HABANA BEGINNING 8 OCTOBER,

Ria

N A VETERANS’ HOSPITAL

Nowra FOR "REASONS THAT BAD -

AIS SON. DAVID HAD A RESIDENCY IN SURGERY,

mtn tin, Saket ae

“IN “CHICAGO BUT WAS DISCHARGED LAS
NOTHING TO DO WITH HIS COMPETENCE"

a THIS INFORMATION HAS BEEN MADE AVAILABLE TO THE BUREAU

. as

a Sew: 7 Pan.
Sh We. iy . oC N/a/Hoxico
CI/Liatoon zinatlvo Qeriepes
QULEASDING OPPice . SBE CRET er cen
: . . . L to” ef es 2
"ESS 1389 “+p runmpre REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE IS PROHIBITED, “f Copy No.

SOI A FE,


--- Page 73 ---
14-0000

039
DATE 11 OST 62.

* "
eer id

To a DIRECTOR

+ RE Pikes eect ene):

FROM = ¢ MEXICO CITY ‘Ne CS Record Value, Destroy. oO.

RI Bie tha copy as tedicated ©

ACTION ». WH 8 rare cory tied a indicated o
. . . BE Tease coe ones _
Mertes 7] Jee ord Qo

INFQ. gy Cl, €1/0PS,..8/C 2 =a
: on Siemetare: . aN

in cite FECT 2168 pos -

: HABANAS

cifne § NEU. ADDRESS APT C= “25 eas 12 NOs . 103, nanan

WORK ING IN TEXTILE FACTORY BUT. Pans TEACH AT wiIvERSITY HABANA es

oa BEGIN 8 OCT. “SON, DAVID, HAD RESIDENCY, SURGERY, aN VETERANS HOSPITAL
: CHICAGO ‘BUT FIRED LAST. MONTH FOR ale Ti NOTHING. To D0. .

- WITH HIS conPETENCE. S oo es

rs SOURCES LINUDS PASSED To opty: natto.

END Secsuce oo,

‘to Rourine: -|
* RID/AN. |

ke: . _ 72 Orb ba

FORM 1389 to Fess . SECDE AH 2958] v
mun

REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE iS PROHIBITED, . Copy Na. “


--- Page 74 ---
/ to Feantved a 1ids cartstea care, drat

Ta Phrestes ee
Yedor.1 suesau of Tevastisiiien | -
- attoctians ir. de: i a7heB

‘pecuty farector (elisa)

a Sabeparagrayh (@} of rofere.cod < a oa ied “unch at eec.atteSa orkrg

She yerled cetapar l}iGeefaarmry ish] Naurfee HALHEL IY Led ebst
& Cit sue in hovéoy teat «no wade Like to oma tack to tie U 9 Qh wos
ached the sures 1f be stosld Agcacs a position 40 Cuba wilea ia bad taag

offered ty Furtre ce

3. Ths éffteo. has retetvead the ferioving atsitiond resort oniserntiag. -
Bile coli frag theca efsee wuich Oawsrl Baked ta aripdad Peparts .

Se "Ca 37 teacher re ‘ srota? source of eds ostion ‘SOvised thst |

Peas addreas

“be Theta 15 no ooere

ae ae

oor Seety ieehetact besratas for: Jgsazity 08

Ferertaet: of stite

of ties sn tobe Sede be | va Kntelstewes

{ revera. tie to



--- Page 75 ---
SU em

C183 7TH LIC

wEf/A1 3 January
Soureer stie727 (vai
Distribution: erig &

ane 4
. en
} a _
PP a aub.003 frea cof : im
- ascresses : vos
1 = State _ tee :
. AS ‘ ,
3: o@ TiAl, Attar Lois: Trederiekaea, 5509
= S&1 chrono . Lo .
iz “RIDAK for ‘2OLSz6561.- :
JL = Consdack - : poe .
: Seoinsied with: THAI - ¢ Se, fer Jed / boca
* Que Sasa, sale. ME ; .
c cl! OOF, of Kiwe weed : .

2
¢ }
ue H
H


--- Page 76 ---
14-0000

foo ~ Beh-12 £9}
~CLASSIFIED MESSAGE - “EP Gerakan WHEIwcne

- SRCRET

: outing

Marked

Signature:

Be C1, CI/OPS,- Fi, S/C 2

\SUAJECT: MAURICE AND EDITH BALPRAIN.

L Access 0 4 wruay BRAS souce, ca 23 mr 1962 moAH:

|. aBORMA WROTE Rosine, iBaR Sex; LH CALIFORNIA ‘Taar mavarce AD
Sor a8 Sore sks Mazo WO AER TO Tak we soe

: STATES So0a, .
2. FE 18 BHLLEVIO TuAT TUR MAURICE AD SOTTH RAVERRED To AR 7

tw t a Cooromaring sealiay aan) LH cllksern
eextnia Srriden . : aurmunricariNg

Cl/Lialscn © BERCRBT Leesa ye
RE PRODUCTION ay OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE IS PROHIBIT. oy Ne

Fork 1369 bor
z


--- Page 77 ---
14-0000

A

_ 3eeRet

(Pon Fil tod Iny

DOCUMENT TRANSFER AND CROSS REFERENCE

OOCUMENT TOENTIFICATION

SUBJTCT OF OOCUMENT

r
RU FILE NO,

YS0URCE CavP TONE

poner ww

#0 OATe PROctssio

so. OTSstwimateo im

DOCUMENT .OISPOSITION

oar PPE PETESELESESS SS tT i
PEERCRRT IQEC r ey | ten
SS_SSSSSSSs5sssssss5

TIT MATT TTT .

ETLMEEPESELITIETITTY)
MemETTITIITI TITTY T TH}

1120 9 s9gseogen

‘ Seeohnaiaaknannnans

sib ee see

FILE THIS FORM: IN FILE NO.

vorw
a7

2 DISPATCH O8 SOURCE DOC. SYMBOL BO. i

| eccoistasset ie zoo-ons-op1 = 628388 |
SEXMOOB? = = | OCE -15041 PAFR .. se
° 03 Jul 62 00000000 0000 oon0eR” ©
oe + Ee Rent TT
RE LIFE -OF SUBY “IN-USSR. , . 2222922222222222_ 2222,

867 ver vecvieus eoereanes SECRET - : . : Por)

Pa

tase) 7850) BW cece op erin. OPTS,


--- Page 78 ---
14-0000

Pet et ne

SURUIECT
NO PACES

SEPERES

DATE OF

INFO 1962 and earlier . : co
PLACE & on .
Qate ava Moscov/1a%~2 _

Oa .
Zt iy UNE VALUATED HPO MATION | an
VALU TED toe —————

“SOURCE Cuban national, A 12 170 216, who arrived tn the UG ir June 1962 as a politieal
refugee. . -

Source 1s a graduate enGineer vho served for a year in the ‘4nistry of Puby.
Works following the advent of the Castro recime, and then wae Resigned to
the Ministry of Foreign Relations and went to the USSR as Feonomtec Counselo:, - . . .:
: : He was in the USS! from October 1960 to Fetrusry 1961. Shortly after kis ree os
SO ~ turn to Cuba‘ ke took asylum Jn the argentine Fabassy vhere he renainad. Seok.
. a . more than a year until his cafe-contuct ws arranged. This is one of H . . ..

several reports from source, oe

n

" fois reptrt emanated from the Caribbedn Admtoston Senter at Opa-tocka,

1. | Fre Cctober 1945 to February 1961 T served as Sconomte Coumselor of the
- Cuban Rrbasey in tre USCR.. During my stay I met ar  vecane fairly vell
Acquainted sith a mmber of defectors fre » Including Donglas
 Melean, who defected fron the UK, and ‘Maus from the (3. I did
not neet Guy Burgesc, because I was toye ‘ad physical
condition due to excess drinking. McLean, who fe now Imow, ‘ae Frazior

af likevise drinks heavily, and at a party the hostece m+ down on Hie Tquor

*

saying, "If he drinks too much he gets in bad shape

ed quarters tr
raine Mote?

“8 nev, but not elahoratée, apartme
wife mile a miter of

lean end hs Tanily are Levine in 'Sovtet, Gove

yoked abo:
Inelidinr ca tous ‘the elevators
- ever working. | He: ales mide son half-heartsa
spitting when the; spoke, : _ .

t the tine T ned nih he wae on the ctaf of an Aytigh

7

/ Maurice Ralverts ver a U5 national, and 7 deltove tay :
s : , US untiveretty, Re subsequently worked at the National Rank : yout,
/¥RS expelled about 1956 and went to the USSR. 4 ats ns tuner

in econcnics at Moscow University. Malnerin a:
used by "Che“k:evara in hiumeech at Pinta del

wtern the oneech vas Publiuhed, "
- gel- 13x56
3 Fuk 62

4

~ Ow

XO DISSEM apRoaD
TAB ee, Wend wrthis Gy
1 fen edaa!e tapes ting oelty Ho

Seternal pryete or
1, Store wr Oetenae: uninss the

eer

” ABD, Coane tare


--- Page 79 ---
14-0000

we or amen ime

| .
NS “= going to the “AST, :
. seasans arrests of life fn the Sovs
oend~

~“NOew
a ae gy

RATER ey carareet mar ETO ok ee



--- Page 80 ---
t ; a coe

(7) UNCLASSIFIED ©) tttEanat

—_—
a . ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET
SUBJECT: {Opronot)

FROM: : ~

. [° SSCL 3/70. 537
cr/sta “De ru. ¥ May 462

: TO: Oeugrction, room number, und i

| 20; some ~ | oe] COMMENTS (Humber eech comment 10 stow tom, stom
4

7 .

| meawen D MALS © whom, Drow 0 hee ocrass colvmn otter each comment }

i
| oate
|

t sil eze ces i

i woo cfct as i] — ee fir , . es :
} fe —— OSI copy: should be passed
t

Hf

: by Mr. Flynn; -as the Air Force
su ks... Ras ap interest in. the Rand

. in reattached, By ,Neal ssid this is indeed a sensitive source, ... ._
‘He said that no control age held over it-and no reqiis. could be..lavied..
Halperin, former OS3,is now in the USSR and. is khow ts be interested .

in Latin American affairs but it ig ot firmly known whether or not

this ineludes Cuba. He is now a tristed merber of the RIS. - .

Note. There is more to this but I will have to tell you as ‘further ~~ *

“putting on paper@becifically dented “7A. oF

An re the. Rand Ccrporation, It is a West Coast Co.
‘the Alr Force, It is in fact a prporiety

~ research on all nanner of subjécts, mostly 5
range. Thaé. material’ contained-in the. attac

the: AF. by. Tony Flinn, «+: - 2 IR

under contract to”
cmpany conducting’ =
Cientific and nostly long

hed was verbally passed to.”

“CIA éontact with Rand Corp, is Ea. ‘Giller ‘who aow ‘vorks vith ‘Scoville...
. T have not es yet Sontacted bin, ans . a oo :

Ped

aes 610 eee" C)-seemt CONFIDENTIAL» [1] IHTEINAL > UNctaSsIFIED

0 1m) On tates

La OC) cor “ewtiat =© sécrer”


--- Page 81 ---
14-0000

.
oo HEM Paks Oh Crate
vO Feteral asreaa of inte rAiyation
aseentione ire 0 Uy iascea .
FUR CT Raa io

Tart es
Sareag Fila Sue b5elh 03

Lo, ROEM FELD- :

Jo Fron @ oseri\.ve pecrre cy Knove Pellaillity, it to9 been . aD):
Mearns Qbét Sr6 SiditeR Foul Ze Li atle seed, ah?
Comncetiert, — aassin ef Muvptes ° oa. 3 i a

| & Geainar fy Bich -echoal otadenta of the tou aR: mn i
‘ 24 eboat 7

Teseber'e Metin: Sousa, wrt, ©

‘Totin aserita was lod ay i pofegser @ yornt, Liellaiesecrican”  : :
Trefesscy fres aseleyna follores. Lore

; f ‘oF 32° atiecedly stated chet

| the #eufesaay eas 5 Visceral, extranyiy. Pellalsssracd, 450: tha -he
~ Ohh tied? boven eg &N statements lise: “Mere peca!s are RL led
as Nisiest oxtiecets ta. Vonearela. thos <a Cuba's ond +4 Loan
“Senetheas te haererisg fo gone 1a Cabay qotblag in Venoguola,?

Be Aetcrilos to sores, Wo previous vers “refesoer :
ded: leoteret 99 Guba for seven Gvocre wt Colssdig Eni verai tr. Joree,
eons, + $0 going Se ware Kor tee “

Bash ORS Bette ww eato plas paliey for Letia dsaericas- Sho?
rita in

{9 quoted an saying tere ure closet RO earerte: on iatts 2
be de +3 pouks (atious 53), ke is cunpidared

- Se secreting Se eosres, ne, IU" Sa" mebeittteg
Views aa tralpasar Wars! to Kaspise WEN LB Foceey,
; “be FR te reqinated tons \nforeatiea ‘ecttatned 16 this.”

Bo Commealestion pesst veins ft: ‘ Giereniastion vitheat prick. - |
“7 gasrétear tas WHOA t8:5 Gfitee.s Bo

Ps ne

. et ey a

6c Cineetor, orriee of Sewarity
viepartoest of tate

Birvoter of Sreeial investigations : by
ingseatur Ceteral, v2.2 cs (oF t

| gel pansy



--- Page 82 ---
,

Biatribations
Orlge. & 1 @ Addressee
Le Cepartrant af State

Le tr

le
ices b (201-1256)
i @ CIAka
de CH/Lia |

x /S10 /eacRgerter's Ja(17 Hay ssa)

teiihel

es cory
SEROET
RoPdER Eo: ai weed OGHTROL

af -f LE IE/



--- Page 83 ---
é

Tats. 610 “Wess GY] secret =] CONFIDENTIAL. ieee) «== UNchasstFiep

CJ UNCLASSiIED” (1A . () COMCtnENTIAL SECRET-
; ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET ,

SUBJECT: + (Opemenct)

! 5
OFRCER'S COMMENTS (Number each comment to show from whom
WENALS. | 1 whom. Draw a line otsors column otter each comment.)

aly

un Zplarek 62]

Canon



--- Page 84 ---
14-0000

"ee vatay a app ec O Veauey Ib wlil be artad ¢

"850 Latie Stsricsa i an) ‘
rte tirineeming book OR Latin sagrica.

MEYS QUECH TRG Bleegtnp

7 RGREOT

le heference (a' race to your Peccrt om Nectea fyean sete
Sate by facets) Saenk Sdesrd J, Pans Jrey at 5: fy Harssrhusetts, on
6 Fed-osry 109, Your report inutesteg that & lig why ta° u
res\¢iay ia Moses, RL, wag Preparing S bong OM atta Anerica,

_ ® Th the ovent Fear Sereeg nas nah ontet nad ig TOp7 oP trae
BWSitvaticn Fetes A Qetuty, tol, EXyp SOs 3, Sumer Il, we are

Snat thig padlleatiag
eoateins on artiele ty AL: e

728 gatitiet, Pages asa Crisia tn
CURIA", wich iy otates ty by 2 whanter fren


