
--- Page 1 ---
14,0000

104-10173-10097|

| 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992)

*

-” . {

Valentin n Sargeyevdch LOGINCY ; (20120812)

33 December ser ul Yrs old Born foscow

y ec reps céd-NECHIPORENKO. His. Ssahish:
hag,peen ‘described ‘as flacnt with hardly any accent. His $ nglish is fair :
s studyingitnow, > . . a

In March 1966, Xx Liscay/$ was told ie would be haéndted in the future. vy - _
Le. rn a oe wo

In response to L's claim that a radio had been étolen from him, a policeman
‘gas. sent to his aprtment, and L. ended the convérsation by reéruiting the. ~

policeman-at. the rate of 5000 Pesos pér montii. The policeman reported - -the

“4neident ‘and the Metropoliten Distkict Police sanctioned a D/A ov. The.

first and only recorded récuirémant. given the policeman: by: L was: for Soria
lo data’ on{Venezuelan who- spent, time in USSR. | . .

Lis friendly with YATSKOV, replaced him (he elains) as Consul General, (2966), ”

: Shortly after ‘arab-Israeli War L tacitly Persea tre admitted he believed that

Feypt's al arges of rus . involvement on Trael's Peer side were false. : a
* Sy AA» Se Oke. : .
Then’ theres the. the. one about Migs. Elizabeth Duncan wilde. L told her that he Ashe.

_ was_ready to Ngo to the other side". He stated: ‘that he was afraid because

the phones in both U.S.. and Soviet ‘Embassies were bugged. He asked if shé
would go to U.S. Smb. ssy with « She consented and reporting stone

here. VRBREBAN NED

:

* Paul Dillon “observed L and’ BARANOV in 4 e area. 1 of.

CORRES
a hotel where a meeting with: ‘Urdy” ‘DRUSS was@o have taken place
cone” night 280, talking pictures with an 8mm camera. “BARANCT ds a Soviet tech,

i

L pursued ‘AMSLOICH/3,. daughter of a Finnish arent, both in Yavana and in ~

: Moscow. ‘Yis intentions MEXXHE were tinkaxoun', but could have. been romantically Tote

Besse inclined: ‘rather than professiunal. .
Lis an ar "regsive personality. With his fellow workers he’ is dictatorial

he

“and disdainful. He has been known to @##4 return to the, Embassy thoroughly’

gassed, yelling. and shouting and resulting in an altercation ‘with the guard

on duty. Other times he won't finish one drink. He is chauvinistic XHAX to his
ow race and deprecatory to other nationalities. A sneering at'itude, boisterous
and arrogant at times. He can be gentle at othertimes, has frequently labeled
intelligent sEMMXRZHBX He is definitely crafty, :although not particulary subtle,

works fast, dcesn't appear to try hard at cloaking his true intentions, either

in conversation with others or in a recruitment atterpt. Ye is tough as nails.
His build is athletic, his avcearance is rug-edly handsome. He appears:
confident, self-assured in relations with non-Soviets.

De/- oD FY F/ XQ



--- Page 2 ---
14-0900

i

7 Salient featire: of file. is that wocivoy ‘was, never the object .,
° consistent “concentrated attention by anyone. There is. virfually no™--
Yéeporting: on. the LICOZY/S-=-LOGINGV relationship. What ‘there is implies.
that 5 3 is uncooverative and nearly refuses to work with Le

rentions

2 : ee a
; SUSCEPTIBILY TY. Nothing in the snventfonal. sense. Ie he ‘te énying te .
. tell us anything he is, ‘obviously. -trying,-to get: our: attention via’ a Cl.” v
. ploy with the intention. of bringing us to hime oves with’ confidence eo
and noarsinpunttye “certainly not like one 3 ‘be. in: trouble. . A

‘ PRCFESSICANLISNY Not! ‘smooth and. subtle nor. particularly. secitré., “Fut :
crafty, fast.on his: feat, inakés fast ‘decisions aid thén acts ‘on ‘then.
Aggressive and ubiquitous. Secdally actives Wonsn-chaser.” co, 7 so

, “persone: See above.

Shovld be eaving before another year and chechalt. Has been thera: for
: threa and one-half _yearse oO 4 tae : od .

See. other similar cases, — A oe S

a t

ame


