
--- Page 1 ---
o ot

104-10069-10186 : | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992),
gear a = nr 7G ~ soe . ST

Pep AN unl ete

®

SS a

a WG cst =
i Chief of Station, JMVAVE i SNS Ce
toacr Opera tiona 1/GYROSE ;
Agreed Activities Sor

RCTION REQUGED REFERENCES

REFERENCE: DIR-14742 je i

arrived in Wiami on 6 June 1962. After Maj. Watlington had an op-

portunity to discuss the local situation with Lt. Col. Carles Causes *

‘the local ACSI representative, arrangements were made for a lengthy

session on the subject of Agreed Activities. It tas agreed that

this discussion would take place at 1000 hours on 7 June 1962 at a
JEWAVE safehouse facility. This meeting subsequently took place as

| . geheduled and was participated in by Lt. Col. Causes, Kaj. Watlington,
Dudley R. JENTONS, Charles B,.WIESINGER and Andrew K, REUTEMAN.

| fhe specific points which were outlined in this discussion are

\

|

|

|

i 7

. 1. INTRODUCTION. As a follow up to reference, Maj. Watlington
Ht

covered in the following paragraph.

2. DISCUSSIONS. in the course of the 7 June 1963, conversations
with ACSI representatives the following topics worthy of recording
were discussed.

a. Opa Locha Refugee Referral Procedures. aj.
Watlington made the point that in accordance with the
agrecrents which had been reached between ACSI and
KUBARX, local procedures were to be agreed upon in
order that ACSI might obtain refugee referrals froa
Gra Locka which could be used as a basis upon which to
mount OB collection operations. Maj. Watlington under—-
scored the point that ACSI had no interest or charter
to run other than OB collection operations. At the — : |
cane time if any of their operations produced intelli- 3 OF |
Gence on subject matter other than OB, this intelligence ° 5 i
would be reported via existing ACSI reports channels,
REUTELAN indicated that JLAIAVE, acknowledged the validity

of ACSI's mission in the OB field, and we were therefore
willing to 99 erate fully in this regard. On the other ’
‘* ponastee Biiiéved that it was essential that certain _
Li pd 7 ye ft

scr 8°

thetribution:
3. - Chief, TFW

aU oo.
"bo Net Reproduce” TO TBO i


--- Page 2 ---
500000 eee eae : —— ene
o a = SONTINUATION OF CLagainICATION . DiFATCH GYD: AKD KUMBIA
a BIGPATEH . SECRET UFGA-4322

oafeguards bo built into any Opa Locka r@ferral in.order
that we could minimize the possibilities for duplication
“of effort and/or wire crossing. This concept was readily
accopted by Maj. Watlington. It did not, however, strike
a totally responsive chord in Lt. Col. Causes. This was
noted but in order to proceed with preliminary arrange-
nents, REUTENAN put forth the proposal that ACSI register
a list of dgent requirements with Opa Locka and that this
‘list could then be used as a basis upon which refugee
screenings could be conducted. It was suggested that Col.
Kail would be the logical point of reference in Opa Locka H
through which the referral system could be managed. In came
: *this connection it was pointed out that once Col. Kail a
identified an individual whom he considered tobe pri- —~
marily.of ACSI interest, he could arrange for this indi-
vidual to be referred to Lt. Col. Causes' covert unit,
At the same time Col. “ail would make arrangements to pass
to KUBARK representatives at Opa Locka and to Station
JMWAVE o copy of the Opa Locka debriefing of the individual
who had been referred to ACSI. Upon receipt of this in- :
formation KUBARK representatives at Opa Locka and at
Station JMWAVE would review the referral, If this review
revealed that the individual was not of operational
ars, anterest to JIMWAVE and his primary access was not in fields
. y other than OB, no objections would be expressed relative
to ACSI retention and full exploitation of the body. Maj.
Watlington expressed satisfaction with this proposal and
“gtated that he would be prepared to discuss it further
once he had an opportunity to personally review the func-
tioning of the Opa Locka_center. ~
YL QA ecb agiio or Re use by aveTherUs. Agentg Tune b/
\ far b. Antonio “CUESTA Valic. “Born 13 June 1926. Lt.Col.
\(° Causes asked if wo Could clarify the current status of
« our relationship with Cuesta. As this name did not ring
vr a bell with any of the JMWAVE representatives, Lt. Col.
Causes was asked for further details. This produced the
ptatement that ACSI was interested in CucSta ‘ind wanted
to uso him in an infiltration operation: ACSE had allegedly
previously traced Cuesta with Station vMVWAVE and had re-
ceivod the reply that’ KUBARK had been in touch with the
individual but had terminated him because he was unreliable.
, In view of this response Lt. Col. Causes wanted to know
whether we would recommend the reuse of Cuesta by ACSI.
Wo responded te this by stating that we would review our
_files and would forward a written reply to Lt. Col, Causes
within tho next few days. . . . soe I
a te BEATZ ER RE vies Ug oredr WS nyeneg Jone.
a c. Laureano *BGATYSPA Falla. Born 1 May 1938. . Lt.
Col, CausdG asked Wwe stliY rétained an operational
Anterest in Batistal EY we did not’ACSE was interested -
in using this individual in an infiltration operation and
83 a resuit wanted JLIAVE's opinion as to Batista's
capability and reliability. We advised Lt. Col. Causes
that we would check our files and would forward a written
reply relative to Eatista within a matter of a few days.
- Bete SABO FR Ge Use A SIgFrky Tune bf
oa ' d. Antonio *ORDONEZ Hernandez. Eorn 24 August 1918.
Lt. Col. Causes asked If We Were currentiy in touch with
Ordonez. Ag this name rang a belli with REUTEMAN we ren:
oponded by stating thatYSubject tas of tnterést to ual In
this connection we indicated we were willing to reexaming]y ,
Gur relationship with OrdoneZj7in order to detérmine “his — 4
full potential or capability, and if his capability was .
‘greater in the OP field than in figlds which wer@ of interest_
to us, we would Certainly consider/ relinquishing our interest,

aw



--- Page 3 ---
CONTINWATION
“C ” BIseATEetA

" CLASGIEICATION

SECRET.

——_—_—$—$———$—

UFGA-4322 —

a

Lt. Col. Caugos stated that he felt that he had
established his equity in Ordonez through the name
trace procedure. Despite this, he had found that
Ordonez had disappeared from circulation; and, there-
fore, he assumed that we were debriefing this man.

e. Third Country Diplomats. REUTEMAN asked the
ACSI representatives whether they were currently in
touch with any third country diplomats. aj. Watlington
stated that\ACSI had previously tried to harness thepy

with KUBARK had resulted in ACSI's being denied the use
of these facilities. As a result Maj. Watlington stated
that at thy present time ACSI was not:'in touch with any
third counjry, diplomats. On the other hand, ACSI was
interested in pursuing the third country diplomatic
serait 8 means of establishing communications with
inside dssets. At this point Lt. Col. Causes stated

how misuse could affect long standing government to
governnent or service to service agreements between
ODYOKE and free world countrics did not make any impact
on Lt. Gol. Causes. This gentleman was predisposed to
interpret KUBARK's refusal to allow him to use certain

2 (diplomatic pouch Phanneis as a clear indication that
Sie-of KUBARK*s “primary responsibilities in the Hiani
area was to restrict and inhibit ACSI operational activity.
Once this attitude was identified no further attempts were
made to persuade Lt. Coi. Causes that our actions had
been taken in the best interests of the intelligence
community.

f£. Wardtime Yafiltvation of ACSE Agents. A dis-
cussion of those Support services which UEARK might
render to ACSX operations revealed that Lt. Col. Causes
was still interested in having JMWAVE infiltrate two of
his egonts into PRRUMEN, in this connection the point
was made by ACSI that under optimum circumstances they
would prefer that JMVAVE assume responsibility, for theo
agents in. the lidami area and then deliver them through a
secure nechanigm to liavana. if this were not possible
ACSX would reluctantly accept infiltrativa of their agents
into any point in PBRUMEN. Lt. Col, Causes was told in
very precise terns that JMWAVE would not undertake to
infiltrate any of his agents into Havana, Ona the other
hand, we would consider any proposal for the infiltration
of selected agents to a beach area in PBRUMEN, The point
was made that in this connection Lt. Col. Causes had to
understand that our maritime capabilities were limited
and we were currently committed to the full exploitation
of these assets for at least six weeks in advance. As a
result any operational plan which he might submit to us
should be keyed to the agsaumption that approximately six
- to eight weeks would pags before we could realistically
consider the servicing of his request. Lt. Col. Causes

agreed to project his operational plans within this frame
of reference, 3

é.

= nsec?

bo geenmmprane ate

co ceases STA ETT ORES

wae ete eet tee NEE png eR PEE SSE SREY

4a

ene epetny pnpeern mene enertmstenetts th ite atonenameel a

&


--- Page 4 ---
PNTILUATION oF ee Gunsivicavion = Tonratch evigion aD Kunal
*. DISPATCH an SECRET UFGA-4322

1 {S0000 . 7 eo : er ae — eet Ne |

. G. Documentation. A discussion of tho documentation ~
problem relative to agent infiltrations revoaled that at
* the ponent -ACST gid not have any.documentation problems
which they’ felt warranted discussion at this session, | 7
: h. " Coordinatioa Forms. The discussion of opsra-
tiopal coordination revealed that ACSI was willing for
JMWAVE to coordinate locally those operational. proposals
which might be received from,Lt. Col. Causes. Once this 7
coordination was effected and if there were disagreoment, ~~.
then the operation could be referred to the Washington L
headquarters of both ACSI and JIMWAVE, Maj. Watlington . >
stated that the forms for effecting coordination in ac-
cordance with procedures which had been agreed upon at
Washington would be sent to both JMWAVE and the ACSI unit
ya in Miami in the near future. In view of this Maj. .
| Watlington suggested that we not initiate the coordination
mechanism until these forms were on hand circa 1 July 1962.

as
reassign uh oR EE

pees

me

a

i. W/T Assets. The discussion of the use of W/T
facilities in terms of PBRUMEN operations revealed that
the Miami ACSI unit did not have any W/T assets in
PBRUMEN at this time. On the other hand, Lt. Col. Causes
was‘ interested in establishing W/T assets in PBRUMEN. In , ot
view of Ghis he asked if JMWAVE would continue to assess,
polygraph and train those individuals that ACSI thought °
were suitable W/T candidates, It was indicated that we ”

tepeereret a

were cortainly prepared to review all appropriate cases
and would render whatever support was required. This then
resulted in a discussion of whether JMWVAVE would be willing
to monitor ACSI W/T transmissions from PBRUMEN in those
instances where the W/T operator had not been assessed,
polygraphed or trainod by KUBARK. We indicated that we \
would ba glad to moniter, such transmissions if we were
told in advance of the date, time and frequencies on which
tho breadcasts were to be made. This then led to a dis~
cussion of whether JMWAVE would be willing to transmit
C/l messages for ACSY agouts. Here again, we stated that
we would favorably concider any requests for C/V trans-
missions providing that we knew the content of the message,
the identity of the agent who was to receive it, and the

« ..@gent's location and equipment which he might be using.
Lt. Col. Causes stated that in view of this discussion we
could anticipato that he weuld be levying requirements on
us in the near future for support in the W/T field.

BMA Mk AMSG EET ETRE te TT em

ee

PRA erty

jo Seeret Writing. A discussion of 3/W teéhniques iv
revealed that i¥ @ yéquest for the issuance of S/W were in
recoived from their Miami representative it would be re-
viewed, and if ACSY approved the operation KUBARK would
be asked to issue a system. If JHWAVE agreed via lecal
coordination that the operation in question required the
use of S/W, then this recommendation would bo cabled to
our Washington Headquarters where coordination would be
effocted with ACSI. Once this was accomplished, KUBARK
Washingtgn would cable to JMWAVE the number of the system
which was\to be issued. JMWAVE would then issue the
system to the ACSI representative in Miami.

3. COMMENT, At the conclusi6a of the above discussion arrange-
monts were Gade for lunch, but Lt. Col, Causes chose not to partici-
pate in the luncheon session. During -the luncheon conversation

Haj. Watlington indicated that he did not believe that Lt. Col.

. Causes would cooperate within the spirit of the DCID's. As a result
he asked that JMWAVE be extremely patient with ACSI until such time -
as Lt. Col. Causes retired and could be replaced. Maj. Watlington

t

eed

o&


--- Page 5 ---
ORBPATCH GYESEOL ARD WUMEEN

UFGA-4322

CLASUIIcATION = *

SECRET

indicated that the retivemeat was scheduled to take piace at the
end cf September 1962. At the end of thé luncheon session ar-
rangenmonts were made for JENTONS to take Maj. Watlington on a ~
rour of Opa Locka, Based on this tour additional discussions

axe to be held with Maj, Watlington. particularly in regard to
tho development of proceduites for referral of agents to ACSI
from the Opa Locka flow.

4. OPA LOCKA, Maj. Watlington and JENTONS subsequently
went out to the interrogation center at Opa Locka, Here they
had an interview with Col. Kail, “the tenor of which was, on the
part of Maj. Watlington, to assure himself that the ACSI repre-
sentative, Francasi, was having adequate access to operational
leads. Col, Kail said that operational leads were shared ac-
cording to their abilities between the KUBARK representative and
the, ACSI man. However, there were occasional difficulties in
assuring that the men best qualified received the body in question.
In addition, he said KUBARK. occasionally pulled a man out of the
Center without his completing the full treatment which precluded
the ACSI representative's getting his hands on someone who might
be well qualified for their operations, Maj. Watlington believed
that assurance that the ACSI representative got a fair deal
might be achieved through a more complete briefing of Col.
Trudencio Ulibarri, who is in charge of the preliminary screening
so that he would more fully understand what was needed. JENTONS
said that this would be a very good idea, but that it would be
better if it were a dual briefing with a KUBARK representative
being present as well. Maj. Watlington said that he would ask
his headquarters for permission to have such a briefing given.
Coil. Kail expressed his opinion that the assignment of JENTONS
to formal liaison with the ACSI representatives would do much to
eliwinate present difficulties and all present echoed this pious
thought.

5S. AGREEMENT, When JENTONS turned Maj. Watlington over to
Lt. Col. uses after the meeting at Opa Locka, the two ACSI
representatives said that they believed that, for the time being,
it would be better to’ continue the system as at present, pending
JENTONS' permanent arrival at the beginning of July 1962. As. Lt.
Col. Causes is obviously skeptical about the outcome, this was
agreed to as a stopgap measure.

END OF DISPATCH

Pat

Jf 2-2
g hence


