
--- Page 1 ---
Thos 10305-10005) | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 | :
pcr MROREHUSRSEBRRBENDAE  2EORONESEEEEEEBRESESERROY “/SRRBSRREERBeRBeNERES |
pe EEECRRGESGES ITER EBAUSNHNEONEOCESEROEMORERMRwe? CHODEORERCOREREREGE|

O4-10305$- ~ Is '

Os es ee

a moe

23 August 1978
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

FROM: . Bruce L. Solie
; Chief, Security Analysis Group

SUBJECT: NAGELL, Richard Case
. #o6h 170

1 ee

wee ene me ee ee ce ey

1. This memorandum identifies those Office. of Security |
files which were reviewed by House Select Committee on :
‘Assassinations (HSCA) staff members in conjunction with the
HSCA'S investigation into the deaths of President John F.
Kennedy and Dr. Martin. Luther King,. Jr.

ONT ne nenee een OM BEES BREDA Ae iE Oe Se a a

2. Under: procedures established with the HSCA, certain’
items of information were not reviewed by HSCA’ staff members.
These items were placed in envelopes, sealed, appropriately
identified, and put back into the security file prior to
HSCA review. Office of Security personnel reviewing these
‘files should maintain the integrity of each envelope below
so that interested parties may know what was and was not
reviewed by HSCA staff members.

; 3. In-some instances, the above files contain ‘material
marked in the lower right-hand corner with a green circular
dot. This mark should alert Office of Security personnel to
the fact that this material was located and placed in~the™
file at the’ time of the. HSCA. review and was seen by an HSCA

a fen This material should not be removed. from the
‘ile. ; ;

WEDGE RIBAS DRA RE SN CORSA ASA OSReAsinneRaaane

7
t

gener ereeneeanncerernnenneace

SAROGRANL

4. Attached to this memorandum is a review sheet which
identifies the Mame of the HSCA reviewer (s) ‘and the. date of
‘his review. .

BRRAAGR

S. “Questions regarding the above procedure and/or the
HSCA's rev eu Ufo be directed to the. Security Analysis

G .
OUP. REVIEWED 8Y FRVJFR TASK FORCE

UN Abis de

\C ebeaat it We
RELEASE iN PART”
TSTAL DENIAL

y
a

Bruce L. Solie

' Attachment

itekd COSKURIRRUCHERREOEOR ESCURNEUCSRRAREA RHP RAE ER BR AURRUREENRERNERERL

te ete em eee SORT NEAT eee em oT TERT CT TAT TET EE EI GU AT OFA STAT PL Rota et eos PUR ET et et ct ra net arene

AQMGSAAAZALOCHANZANS AAR OREO SOE

ul
bt

DUN SITARORASAON SRN

a
‘Es

nx
ae)


--- Page 2 ---
13-00000

“ME EARQUART: hee Bie

oes

Jia

fs

HEED at cia

CUSTODIAL. UNIT/LOCATT

oe Ru :VEEWING. OFFICEA

10 _POCUMI: NTS MAY BE -corrEn ORE ;



--- Page 3 ---
13-00000

5850 Hollywood Boulevard ae oy
‘Los Angeles, California 90028

Dear Hey Grenobie:

, This letter is in response “to ‘the distortions and outright falsitie

BANK ROBBER, 'MANCHURIAN CANDIDATE’: LINKED TO JFK ASSASSINATION PROBE,
which appeared in the duly 25- 31 edition or the Los Angeles Free’ Press|:

: I request that the Free Press either print a retraction of such. lies

Mire Turner, ‘who spent ‘ten years asa Special Agent of the FBI, is: not |.
./ unfamiliar to me. He has authored similar articles, both during ny; |
* imprisonment in the United States. and while I was detained in the-

S cited numerous lies about me. He has proved himself adept at putting.

; - eredence to his major untruths, a skill he probably. developed while |
' serving with the Bureau's intelligence-security division. » His. recent.
claims: cause me to wonder whether or not he ever left the FBI. 8

. much of his latest baloney, is a character that .I.feel should either .
." purchase a‘hearing aid or consult a psychiatrist. Each of my. so-
-.-@alled discussions with him (all but one occurred over the elephone)

- I am. Listing the “following facts in rebuttal. t
: “fables” .

. "decorated hero of the Korean War,” nor did the ;
‘.about “a career in Army intelligence." More to the point, the docu- |.
‘ments found in my possession and under my coritrol (some of which were
-. returned’to me only last year-by the FBI) ensured: my incarceration ~
fora longer period than I had anticipated. -They also guaranteed my:
‘being held practically ineommunicado for many months (for eleven. =
‘months I was not even vermitted to read.a newspaver), not to mention

‘nor were they effected for the purpose of establishing rapport. —

oo After my. acquittal (in 1968, “not in 1967) I did not “drop from sight,"

~ Registered Mail <*> >

yet

ye tes a ugust 12, 1975

Ms. ‘Penelope Grenoble, Editor
Los Angeles Free Press -

printed about me in the article written by William W. Turner, titlea |

and: distortions or publish this letter.

German Democratic Republic,-in which he knowingly and purposefully ~

words in my mouth and misquoting his sources of information to lend’

Professor Richard He ‘Popkin, ‘from ‘whom Mr. Turner obviously tollecte

the. curtailment of my most basic constitutional safeguards. ..

My contacts with Lee Harvey Oswald did not entail any “friendship,”
I

r
ie



--- Page 4 ---
13-00000

Jo, as. es Parner, the FBI and the CIA damn we), knows
I have never ‘stated to anybody, either verbally ‘or in writing, ‘that:
‘in-1963 I was an agent for the CIA, although in 1974 I did state, .°-
under oath, that I thought I had been functioning for the CIA during. .
“Spart of 1963. Mr. ° furner is also aware that less than two months ©. noe
_..-after President. Kennedy's death FBI agents confronted me with their: ~ _
“--suspicion that I had “acted as: an unregistered agent fora foreign. = )/.)°*
power," inferring that I was a spy for one of the Cuban intelligence |
services (several years later the CIA,. through one of its: "former": :..-
- ease officers, accused me of having been a Soviet. spy; still tater, a
~ one FBI. agent suggested: ‘that I had worked for the Chinese). a ;

- The | registered - letter: that was dispatched at my ‘instance to FBI can
. Director J. Edgar Hoover in September 1963 (not necessarily on the _
_. 13th) revealed sufficient details to warrant an immediate investiga-"
tion (if not the arrest) of Lee Harvey Oswald and two. Cuban refugees,
I certainly "assumed" that some “action”. would be taken by. the FBI. - :

“I was not the ‘least bit “frantic” ‘about anything ‘in September 1963. to.
I did not set foot inside the Republic of Cuba during that monthe 9 |i.
fo my knowledge I have never talked to any “Castro aides." The main --

‘distinction between some American intelligence officers that I knew
« ‘and hired killers were the procedures utilized in murdering their .
_<vietims and/or the methods used to disassociate’ themselves and. the.
; Ue Ss. government from their crimes. we . . .

. I. had no fear of being implicated “in ‘the planned assassination" at
the time of my" arrest or prior thereto. ; ., Lo ‘

 @he two letters that I mailed to ‘James Le Rankin, General Counsel to.
the Warren Commission,‘ were not sent through “private. Shannels.” They!
-_ Were sent through ‘proper: jail authority. . . eee

.Z have never ‘claimed. that I- “squirreled away a “snapshot of. mys
-with Lee Harvey Oswald taken in Jackson Sauare in Néw Orleans in-1963
. XZ -have never stated that I-am "willing to surface and tell (any). story| -.
_) to Congress". or to. anybody. And I did. not reveal any detaits about» yes
: Mre Oswald. to Professor Popkin: that are "new" or ‘unknown to the PBI. ;

Gln LC. haga Me ;

“" Rithard C. Nagel



--- Page 5 ---
13-00000

. .: SAN DIEGO, (PNS)
“20, 1963, a rangy man with a

. the suspect,.
: Nagell, 32, was no ‘ordinary.

- coy tae

’ a Los Angeles’ Free Press

Bank robber,

. what many consider to be im-
proper CIA activity, both at
home and abroad, has.
. reawakened interest in decade-
old challenges to official, ver-
: Sions of the assassinations of

~ John Kennedy, Robert Kennedy

‘and Martin Luther King. As new

tacts also begin to emerge,
-Congress taces growing
Pressure toa reinvestigate the

‘JFK assassination. ~

What follows are the strange

- ' Stories, disclosed here tor the

- first time, of two figures ~
Richard Case Nagell and Luis
Angel Castillo — long of interest:

- to assassination researchers. |

WILLIAM W. TURNER
— On Sept. -

vertical scar on ‘his forehead
_Strade into the State National
Bank in E! Paso, Tex., and re-

..: quested $100 in travelers’
~ checks. Before the teller could

. /.comply, he whipped out a pistol
and fired two shots into the ceil--
“ing. Then he waited to be .

: arrested.

Police quickly realized that
‘Richard Case

bank robber. Papers he carried
-Showed that he was a decorated

. hero of the Korean War who had

gone. on to a career in Army
‘Intelligence before being dis-
_ charged with the rank of captain
_in 1959. - :

Why had-he pulled the non-
“robbery?
: Last. week Dr. Richard H.

say 26-21,1975.° 4 aes

‘Manchurian Candidate’

inked to JF K assassination probe

~" ED. NOTE: Recent exposure of .

Popkin, a philosophy professor

at Washington University in St:

Louis, stepped off a plane in the

. Nation's capital lugging a brief- .

‘case containing documents $:il-

luminating the strange case of -.
the man who shot a bank. Also.
crarnmed into the briefcase was |

a thick sheat of papers relating
to a bizarre “Manchurian Can-
didate” episode in the Philip-
pines in 1967.

Both the Et Pago and Manila
‘incidents, Popkin said-in an in- .
terview before ‘leaving for |

Washington, were linked to the
Dallas assassination of John F.

Kennedy on Nov. 22, 1963. They -

would “crack the case wide

« " open,” he. predicted.

The slight, bearded academi-
cian was stopping in

“Washington to present his .dis- -

coveries. to Attorney. General
Edward Levi and the Senate
Select
intelligence Activities before go-

ing on to a conference of fearn-:

ed philosophers. .
The Second Oswald -
- Popkin is no stranger to the
“JFK investigation. In. 1966 he

which chronicled several in-
stances of someone imper-

sonating the man later accused .

of slaying the president. At the
time the book

closed that as early as June 3,
_ 1960, FBI Director J. Edgar
‘ Hoover himself .wrote an in-

terdepartmental memorandum |
citing evidence of an- Oswald ©.

Committee on.

-letters from prison.:-

gained scant .
attention, but recently it was dis- |

imposter. The FBI knew-Oswald moe

at that time as a defector to-~
Russia,-and, some conspiracy
theorists believe, as a possible
CIA agent.

Popkin said he had. been in ~
touch with Richard Nagell, now

living near San Diego, and had ~-.
‘learned about
friendship with Lee Harvey -
--Oswald. Nagell has fascinated
~ assassination researchers ever ~.
since an FBi report filed with the | -

Nagell’s-

Warren Commission. quoted .—

him. as saying he had met with: -
Oswald in Mexico.City and Tex- -
‘as. But the former intelligence .
officer had been inacessibte. He...

remained ‘in prison tor the Et.

* Paso caper until his conviction = -
‘was reversed for - insufficient

evidence in 1967, after which he ~~
dropped from sight.
Nagell’s Version
‘Nevertheless,
were able to glean some picture

: of Nagell's significance trom his: . .

defense pleadings and onyptic :

~ In August 1963 Nagell, works »
ing as a CIA agent, learned of a

_ domestic plot to.assagsinate the: -
published. The Second Oswald, ©

president, involving Oswald and~

‘anti-Castro Cubans, He in--
formed his CIA superior. but...
feared nothing would be done

because he lacked details. On

Sept. 13 he dispatched a letter -
warning J. Edgar Hoover of the...)
plot but again assumed no ace. «..

tion would be taken.

As Nagell understood, it, ae

Kennedy was to be shot.in -

researchers. -

- (please, turn to page 33):



--- Page 6 ---
13-00000

- no reply.

-INATION-

Wotae,

(continued trom|, 7) a
Washington about Sept. 26 (as
it turned out, JFK left Sept. 25
for a whirlwind tour of the West).

Frantic, Nagell flew to Havana

on Sept. 19 to see if Castré

' aides could shed light on the’

assassination plot, but the only

www ee we ee

If this photograph does exist
it would lend credibility” to

:  Nagell’s account. And Na” Iss
‘willing to surface and te. as
_ Story to Congress, Popkin says,

provided protective conditions

. are met.

“Manchurian Candidate”

Pookin is also convinced that -

the Manila “Manchurian Can-

advice they could offer was to.
execute Oswald in the hope that .

. would stop the plan.

- But Nageil teft Cuba deciding

“that he’ “was an intelligence

agent, not a killer." Flying to Ei

” Paso via Mexico City, he walked

into the bank the next day for

“ “the sole purpose of having

myself arrested and detained by

- federal authorities’ — ap-
‘parently- fearing that his
. association with Oswald would
‘ implicate himself in the planned.

assassination.
Nagell was In the El Paso Jail

: when Kennedy was shot In

- Dallas two months later. He sent |
an offer to testify before the —

- Warren Commission through

“private channels” but received

Dedicated Leftist
In his recent discussions with
Popkin, Nagell has revealed

’ new details about Oswald. He

first met Oswald, he said, in the
late fifties at the U.S. naval base
at Atsugi, Japan, where Oswald
was a Marine Corps radar

. Specialist. They became friends
but didn’t encounter one.
another again until August 1963 -

when Nagell learned of the plot
against Kennedy.

‘Disputing claims that Oswald
had ties with the CIA, Nagell

-belleves that Oswald was a

dedicated leftist who was duped

- by anti-Castro exiles involved in

didate” case was connected to
the JFK assassination. On
March 2, 1967, a man named
Luis Angel Castillo was detain-
‘ed by the Philippine National
Bureau of investigation after he

had contacted teft-wing - Huk

guerritlas. Questioned under
truth serum and hypnosis,
Castillo blurted out a tale of hav-
ing been taken to a building in
Dallas, Tex., the day Kennedy
was shot, handed a rifle
assembled from components.
hidden in a bowling bag and in-
-Structed to fire at a man in an

-open car sitting next to a lady.

The signal to fire would be given

_by mirror flashes.

The story caused a brief sen-
sation at the time. The Manila
Times bannered: " ‘JFK Plotter’
in Manila!" Wire service dis-

‘patches to. the United States

said Castillo was a “Cuban-
trained Communist agent” who

“hadn't shot because he heard ©
that a man named Joe “had -
already shot. the man in the

‘open car.” The story was so im-
Plausible that it quickly died.
Not long ago the hypnotist
who conducted the interroga-
tion of Casiiio for the Philippine

* authorities arrived in this coun-

the conspiracy. Posing as~

’ Castro G-2 intelligence agents,
the exiles wheedled Oswaldinto -

becoming a “fall guy” by playing

on his Castro sympathies, pain- .

ting Kennedy as anti-Castro and
promising that he would be
Spirited to Havana after the

’ assassination.

Nageli told Popkin he met
with Oswald both in Mexico Clty
and New Orleans, hotbeds of

‘ the anti-Castro movement.

“Nagell claims he has squirrel-
ed away a snapshot of himself
with Lee Harvey Oswald taken
in Jackson Square in New
Orleans in 1963," Popkin as-

-serted. “In the picture are two

other men, both anti-Castro

‘Cubans, who were pretending -

try under the name Vincente A.
Sanchez. When Popkin took a

fook at his reports, his eyes —

popped.

The reports termed Castillo a
“zombie = a  hyp-
noprogrammed robot.

Double-Agent Network

Sanchez extracted Castillo’s
-rambling story over a period of
weeks. Castillo, then 28, was in-
ducted around 1960 into a
“Special Operations Group”
which afforded him paramifitary
training. In 1961 he participated
in the Bay of Pigs invasion, as a
pilot for the CIA. Thereafter he
infiltrated a double-agent

network, posing as a Com--

munist in Venezuela and Il-
quidating a.Communist agentin

Mexico. .

In talking about the JFK
assassination, Castillo —
despite some disjointed
phrases — was nevertheless
able to describe in some detail

ere aes neue On CULE agence ae

ordered, “They got him already. '
Let's get out of here." After the

rifle was disassembled and: !
' stuffed in the bowling bag, he. ©
was hustled into the car which

had brought him to tne building..

- It stopped twice within blocks tO .

pick up other men...

In 1967, according to
Sanchez. Castillo was
programmed to assassinate

Philippine President Ferdinand ~~

Marcos after openly associating

with the leftist Huks — which °°:
- would implicate them tn the -
assassination. Popkin paints. -
out that this is a similar ploy to *
’.the one Nagel attributed to the ~

anti-Castro Cubans’ use of
Oswald.”

Until recently, the ‘Castitia .
episode’ might have seemed a---

logcial impossibility. But the

release of the Rockefeller |.
Report, with its revelations. .
- about secret CIA projects to in-.

duce behavior modification In

unsuspecting subjects, make... ~~
the possibility of a “Manchurian

Candidate” more than mere’
fantasy. (In the Robert Kennedy -

assassination, Dr. Bernard Dia-_

mond, who examined Sirhan

Sirhan for the defense. testified”.
_that he believed Sirhan was

hypnotized at the time of the

-shooting.) aa
Although ~ the current.” mo

whereabouts of Castillo is un-
known, the Sanchez reports
contain the names of six per-
sons who supposedly ran his
network, including the “control
officer” and a woman who hyp-
notized him. Popkin’s own in-

vestigations have shown. that. .
- these peaple do exist. . :
Through Popkin their stories"

have now been passed on to the

‘Attorney General and the ©
‘Church Committee. 7 aaa
William Turner's latest book, :
The Cuba Project, the story of -
the CIA's secret war against -

Castro, will be published this fall

by Houghton Mittlin. Qe*



--- Page 7 ---
13-00000

| KRAMER, JOE

| a , -OR 69° M341008 ; a:
1 7YM “ /8- O5AUG 30 | |
|
|
|
|

| 7D. LST. 18JUN69; P23. DEFECTORS MACHINE .LST-
| DEFECTORS FILE

Ran rng ge ee



--- Page 8 ---
13-00000

EXTRACT
.U.S. DEFECTOR MACHINE LISTING - JULY 1973

“RICHARD CASE NAGELL



--- Page 9 ---
13-00000

eedee de name eee ee TEER, 3! 1 aa skeet ieee qetetsneegenerexnaze

MM

ar |

M

“Me

M

“M PLACED NOTICE IN UNDERGROUND NEWSPAPER AUG 89 oo :
’ STATE - DST-18736. ee —SECRET.3° SEP 69...
THELEN GRO REE RN EASTER ANT CER R RETR ERE CH RE ELEN om Ks ee Ee PR a eu hee Re

4

6ING2
G9A02
69402
AKO?
69A03
69403
69003

Q

U
oN

Q

U

R A 137202 . 291-0746537 :
: Qa. RONAGELL 0-0 Flo RICHARD J case. _— vee
1, a © USA/NEW YORK “GREENWICH 7. 05 AUG 30. ~~~
@- 29A90 9 SA a
1 ARM GRA A SOB ;
POP M OBASE i ees cy yee ee EMACT,
Vg" Mm 63ACL X- AB ATTEMPTED SUICIDE SEVERAL TIMES : .
SN SL), a
@ 3°° 69003 A .
: a a _M “49401 B. NAGELL -
{ R MS 51A01 B KRAMER :
FeO 8M S4AOL RB CRAMER I
“pop RM 59A0) 8 NOLAN ROBERT
{ fo 8.4 62401 B CRANE 2 SOR .
. RM 48001 C | USA/NEW YORK GREENWICH x
RM 43A0L D USA 97542069 NE YORK 24 MAY 68
RM 59A01 X " E1-DTSMISSED. “FROM JOS" sun 62 ; ; “ ;
» @ & —M 62A01 © £4 FLUENT . _ _ JAPANESE. ©
oR 4 48001. G). PRIVATE SN 12 115 891
5 RM {BAOL ¥! GL ENLISTED AS PRIVATE “4 B/D1SCHARGED. AS. SERGEANT, ne dele s
@ 2 M'4gao1 28 G1 TO ACCEDT COMMISSION’ .. : ; : . &
| RM GBACL ARMY USA a
5 RTM 48A01 N USA 48. SL
: @ R Mm 48401 0 STATIONED IN NEW YORK/NEW JESSEY ANO OVERSEAS ee ce)
ROM 48A0L U GFNCY. . “201 SUMMARY - : 20. MAR 69
Ro M SLAOL G “caeratN SN 2028346 a Se ee
OR” M SIAOL H ARMY USA: oe oe : 133)
“UR OM SIAGL_N _ USA/NEW JERSEY FLL DIX, ee BE .
TR Sig Q HONORABLY DISCHARGED ocT 59
@ Rr. 81 -U AGENCY - “1 2O1-SUMMARY. 20. MAR 69. O
oR a Siaol x GRANTED TOP” “secRer CLEARANCE 22 SEP 55/ASSIGNED CIC
“RM SGA0L Lo £4 FACTAL SCARS FROM PLANE CRASH = HEAD
OR 4 54001 M WALTFR REED HOSPTTAL ae Dose
OLRM S4AOL NO CUSAZDESTRICT. 202 WASHINGTON 00 NOV 5420 eR 8
RM 54801 Q” HERE. FOR TREATMENT OF INJURIES NOV 54-APR- 55. ;
@ R °M 54001 -U FRE : OBA-O31T7- cbeee lets, 04 FEB 64° @
- 6 RM S4AOL X “SOLE SURVIVOR AIRPLANE CRASH 28 NOV. 54 SUFFERED. : _
: RM S4A01 Z| XL FACTAL DISFIGUREMENT/GIVEN, PSYCHIATRIC EXAMS _ bce lee
@ Ru SonOL G SPECIAL INVFSTIGATOR : o
_ UR M SONOL He ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CON ROL ZOFPARTHEN. wel el
“TRUM S9A0L MH LEEWARD AVENUE. 4037
-@ oR. & S9AOL N USA/CALTFOPNTA ” 10s, ANGELES 62.0.0... &
fo CR OM 59A01 Q - RESIDENCE. . ;
joa RM S9AOL UO AGENCY esse meet 5201. SUMMARY > ween a 20, MOR 69.
7 @ "RM 62A01 M EMBASSY USA. ee : pa
Po LR SM 62ACL NO MEXT MEXICO
PTR TM 62A01 QO VISITE / FERED INF
1@. RM B2ZAOL UO FST . : 99A-26397....
i RM 63A01L 4. EL PASO COUNTY vate
bE M GBAOL NN LUSA/TEXAS EL PASO
1 O° RM 63001 GO” CARRESTED ATTEMPTING "TO ROR BANK -
Po REM 63001 .U AGENCY ac A 2OL-SUMMARY
fo RTT OM 63A01 2 CHARACTERIZED AS MENTALLY UNSTARLE
1 @ Ro. me ADAOL M CONSULATE USA
jo RTM -68A01 NO SUTS 8 TURTCH 68 : _ UNK
Po RM GBAOT 9 VISTTED CONSULATE“ AND 5 : bee, :
£@ oR + eaAnL AGENCY - ue “06 JUN 4B
Dog RY 6SAO1 XK APOFASTO PSYGHOTIC/PNSS TA DANGEROUS :
RM 66A02 NO” GarK oa 6B ~UNK
p Ro. M 68A02 0 HELO HERE 4 ‘MONTHS: co cllnath gee eee welche) henge en he an
RM 68A02 UO EBT: . 08C-43657" ; ; : 18 FER 69
“RM 68A02 XK | TAKEN OEF TRAIN GOLNG TO W BERLIN BY. E GERMANS “JULY 68 Cet oe ead
RM 6B8A02 Z °° XL. MADE REMARKS EAST GERMANS CONSIDERED DEROGATORY ,
A 8 2M 69AQL M . CONSULATE USA ee center _ en
R S01 N SUIS ZURICH 69° : UNK ;
aR 9. VISITE MAR 7 FOR ASSISTANCE/ THREATENED, EXPOSE. WT GB
ORE “ul “AGENCY ZURT=1629 17 MAR 69
R X | CLAIMED WORKING FOR US GOVT ON. SECRET MISSTON cee ein we
q Z (XL ‘TO MEET JAPANESE IN GENEVA

CONSULATE. USA a
SPAN “BARCELANA

HERE MAR LO/THREATENED EXPOSE US GOVT
“AGENCY LURT-1829
_MSAANEW YORK? NEw YORK 169



--- Page 10 ---
a)

: ‘ arc :
mo SPEED LETTER roo
| Thet fe f

FROM: :
N. Scott. Miler, CI/SIG

The attached telegram. from American Embassy, Madrid, may
not have come to your attention. It may be of some significance
in connection with information about a Richard Case NAGELL with
akas your office sent to the FBI’ 7 April 1964 (Solie originated)
and Richard FECTEAU.

ne fer er act
Fon yros ToGo

: SIGNATURE

RETURN TO ORIGINATOR



--- Page 11 ---
13-00000

SUBJECT: WAGELL, Richard Case

ALLEGATION:

. Richard Case NAGELL, "a
highly decorated infantry
Captain in the Korean War",
alleges that he became a

' CIA agent. He said he

fired the gun in the bank at-
El Paso, Texas because he .
wanted to be in custody when
the assassination of
President. KENWEDY took

- place. NAGELL charged

that "the FBI illegally
seized. from him evidence

_ crucial to his defense,

such as notebooks containing
the names of certain CIA ~
employees » Photographs, two ©

‘Mexican tourist cards (one

in the name of Joseph KRAMER,

_the other in the name of .

Albert HIDEL) and receipts for
‘registered mail, including the one
for the letter ‘sent HOOVER ~
warning of the assassination.
NAGELL: daimed he was in-
structed to "arrow" the
patsy, that is kill him
(OSWALD) after the assassi-
nation. He contended he.

got cold feet and this was
his reason for the attempted
bank robbery, he would rather

. be arrested than commit:
murder and treason.The

article alleges that while it
was suggested in court that

an airplane crash NAGELL. :
survived mentally affected him,
he was given intelligence °
training after the crash.

' Also, NAGELL cc complains he has

been salted away because of
What he knows.

18 datkaaey 1968

CIA CONNECTION:

None; although, Subject was of
interest to 0S in 196) and early
1965 because of information
furnished ‘to the Agency by the
FBI that he had in his. possession
the names of six CIA employees
at the time of his arrest for bank
robbery at El Paso, Texas on: 20
September 1963.

|
i
:

|
|



--- Page 12 ---
13-00000

. SOURCE:

_ 1968 RAMPARTS
Article by William
W. TURNER
OS INDICES RESULTS:

Subject became of interest to the Office of Security in March 1964

‘when the FBI informed the Agency that Subject had in his possession at
‘the time of. his arest for bank robbery at El Paso, Texas on 20 September

1963 the name of Richard. FECTEAU. (an individual by this name was captured

by the Chinese Commmists and is now in prison in China) and of six Agency
employees. Research failed to reveal any reason why NAGELL had these

names in his possession. It was concluded that while NAGELL is unquestionably

unbalanced, his story of being involved in espionage - is not fully contradicted ©
by evidence. He could have been contacted by a Soviet agent while in Washington,

D. C. in December’ 1962 or ‘while he.was in Mexico City in September and October

. 1962. His file contains mostly FBI reports dated 1962 and 1964 and in these

are documented his history of mental instability and physical complaints
stemming foum.the plam crash. Attached isa chronology dated 3 March 1965
made from the information contained in the FBI reports. At the time this
security research was conducted, it was recommended that NAGELL be personally
interviewed by a representative of OS in the hope that NAGELL might reveal
how he came into the possession these names but no further action is. indicated
in his file and this interview was not undertaken:

- DETAILS: .

Subject's file reflects no Agency interest in him prior to March 1964
when the names of CIA employees were found in his possession when arrested
for bank robbery.

The RAMPARTS claim that he received intelligence. training after the plane...
erash is true. The crash ‘occurred 28 November 1954 and he graduated from
Army Intelligence School, Ft. Holabird, Maryland on 15 August 1955. He
served in Korea and Japan as 4 member of the U..S. Army. Counterintelligence
Corps, terminating: about 1958. .A Lt..Col. Ned W. GLENN who served with
WAGELL personally in Korea advised that NAGELL was not stable mentally and
that this instability was probably due to brain damage suffered in the airplane
crash. :

The RAMPARTS article's claim that NAGELL said he fired the gun in the

- ‘bank at El Paso, Texas because he wanted to be in custody when the assassination

took place is not completely in conflict with a statement NAGELL made on

"1 January 1964 which was, however » after the assassination. (see page 4 of

chronology)

The RAMPARTS article's ‘allegation. that the FBI took from WAGELL a note-

“pook containing the names of CIA employees is true.

NAGELL's complaint that he was "salted away" is open to speculttion. A
ten year prison sentence does appear harsh, considering the documented brain



--- Page 13 ---
(> damage he suffered in the B-25 plane crash while he was in the U. 8.



--- Page 14 ---
V3-OOOO0 nn ee nce Bg et

Richard Case NAGEL .
‘Chronological Record of Activities we
po. Be Aug 1948: - Entered Army. (18 years old) _

“Brilliant Korean War Record"
; “Many Campaign Awards" "

28 Nov-1954: Sole survivor of plane. crash. ‘Suffered facial 1 disfigure
: oo ment; given. psychiatric exam. | : . :

15 Aug 1955: iraduated from Army Intelligence School, Ft, Holabir:
, aryland. Served.as advisor to ROK Army in Korea,
. cerned with. intelligence activities; ‘served asa mer

of: U.S. Army Counterintelligence Corps. in: Japan, Senc

and Tokyo, terminating about. 1958.

Col: Ned w. “GLENN,. Deputy: G- 2 U.S. Navy,
» advised on 24:March.1964 that he ha served :
. sonally in ‘Korea ‘with NAGELL. GLENN: vised ,
that NAGELL was. not stable mentally and | Sin-

webiste TT”

; * stability was probably due to ‘damage to bra :
: : “ suffered in.an airplane crash during the Korean War.
"2.29 Oct.1959: 7 Honorable Discharge. -. Captain, U. Se Army :
14 Dec. 1959: yon Empioyea by Department of “Alcoholic Beverage. Contre:
an tae ~ 08: State. of. California, as'a special. investigator :
- 8 June 1962: a Suspended by. ABC, State of ‘California
21 Tune 1962: Dismissed. by ABC .

16 J wy 1962: Shot i in chest "while making a meet! between Malibu: and .
; ‘Oxnard,. ‘Refused to identify. ‘assailants or furnish. infor
mation to: police, subsequently, filed Civil Rights. com-
_plaint against police. Withdrew request ‘for hearing so
he could get money from state of California consisting «
retirement contributions. .and accumulated leave.

AT Aug:1962: Issued tourist card at Los Angeles, California, -

Entered Mexico through Ciudad, Juarez’

“24 Aug 1962:



--- Page 15 ---
"28 Sept 1962: ~

‘“Bppearda voluntarily at ‘Ameridin Embassy, ‘Mexico city,
‘tense, nervous; agitated and antagonistic.’ .

a 7 Inter: alia-stated he had been approached in Mexico

City for: recruiting, refused 'to say- by!whom on. behalf of
what country. Stated that one job-of this sont would be —

in. New York. He volunteered that he’ fully realized that -

what he was saying could be used against him in any «
courtor- prosecution. | He stated that he was "bitter, .
‘disgusted, disillusioned and disaffected". Stated he. knew

- _.. the full ‘significance of the term disaffected. He stated ..

1 Cet 1962:

16 Nov 19622! .

pis Tt 28 Oct 1962:: oe Left Mexico City,

ou - a . 15 Dec 1962:

‘that if he did go to some other country, it would.cost the
. United States millions, He stated that he was "through
being a good citizen" and thought that he had q gotten ae
/ "dirty: deal all around. "

ooo ‘Again appeared a at American: Embassy, } Mexico City,
“wanting to :know what: had been done in regard to getting.

the state of California to pay him the money due him..

Was sent to ‘protection section. Asked what’ séction: of ©
‘Embassy he should contact to renounce his Unitéd States |
citizenship. . .. Was advised by collection’ section that they
could not.intercede for him in ‘collecting money from ©
state. of. California, . Appeared in passport and ‘citizenship
section and asked what the penalty. would be‘for going to ©
an Iron Curtain country and what effect it would have on

his citizenship, Was advised that ‘such action would be ,

- violation, of federal: a

Advised FBI Ain New Yor! é City he wanted to expose >
: Department of’ Alcoholic Beverage Control i in California.

Advised FBI i in. Jacksonville, Florida, that he had been
approached shortly before i in Washington,. D.G., “by

“ individual believed to be working for Soviets. ‘NAGELL’ 7

at this time was noted to be in an inebriated condition - -

; vague. in. answering questions. :

oo 20 Dec. 19628: 22 Jan: 1963: NAGELL at Bay” Pines, Florida VA Hospital.

Condition diagnosed as "chronic brain syndrome associated

- with brain trauma with behavioral reaction. characterized

_by passive aggressive and paranoid features". ,



--- Page 16 ---
24 Jan.1963: .. Asked FBI in. Miami if his Cuban or : Russian « sources .
, _ gave him a pistol. with-silericer and microfilm if-he- ;
would be permitted to return same to this contact so_
he could be of further use to U.S. Government, He
‘stated that in August or September 1962 he met a man :
from Maryland, i in Mexico City who introduced’ him to
individuals whom héibelieved may: have ‘been: Soviet Agent..

a _, «l9 April 1963:. . Advised FBI in Los Angeles, California, | that: the had ne re
| a ce a, ' taken his former wife to court for failure’ to. comply’ with . “s
‘court order giving NAGELL visitation rights with’ children,

4 June 1963: . NAGELL appeared at.the Out Patient Clinic. and v was -re-
vo ' ferred to the Neurological ‘Clinic for treatment. His

condition. was diagnosed. as'depression, tearful, nervous,

; rigid". Would only, utter words “Got to see. my kidd", :

_ 20 Sept 1963: ; NAGELL arrested i in El Paso, Texas, on. charge: of at~

; : tempting to rob State National.Bank, Slashed. ‘wrist night.

of 9/20/63. . NAGELL consistently denied he had ‘tri

_ to rob the bank; stated that the fact that he fir.

-in the ceiling proved he had not been trying to hit anyone,

He stated that he was certain that "all of my problems have

been- solved fora ‘long ‘time, and now I won't have to Bo to

Cuba",

A notebook which the Subject h -had on his person when: ars"

rested made reference to Fair Play for Cuba Committee, -.

the names-of. purported CIA agents and“othéY imférmation.

_ Cell: mate in jail reported that NAGELL disclosed to-him7"""""|

_°, that NAGELL, during confused period after discharge, - > — |

_ »-? decided everything against him in Los Angeles:and made

: . oe ‘arrangements with Communist Party in Los Angeles to

Oo. _ - < + - pick‘up visa and passport from contact in El Paso and

; : eventually end up in Czechoslovakia, NAGELL reportedly o

attempted suicide three times enroute to El Passo but .
lost nerve. :

: (Noteworthy that State Department records reflect issuance o
of Passport to NAGELL on 7 August 1962 at Los Angeles,
California, and that on 9 July 1963 NAGELL signed affi-
davit that his passport had been lost or stolen. He was
issued a new passport on 6 August 1963.)

~3-



--- Page 17 ---
13-00000

‘El Paso Herald-Post article states that NAGELL told
U.S. District Court that he did. not attempt ‘to hold up ©
poe : the bank, "I had a motive for doing what I did" NAGELL |
poe |. told Judge , "but my motive was not to hold up the bank,
‘ ; so T do not intend to disclose my motive at this time."

4 Nov 1963!"

a Subsequent to President's assassination, ‘Subject. claimed
‘ acquaintance with OSWALD and wife.” Marina’ OSWALD
on 1/18/ 65. disclaimed any knowledge of NAGELL..

19 Dec 19632,

|
1.

1-Jan 1964: .  NAGELL furnished. a signed statement: to
: mo... In September 1962, -while I was in flexico 3 City,a
_ representative of a foreign government *preposed to me
that I participate in an act; such act being a criminal
offense and inimical to the best interest. of the United
_ States. “At that time, I refused such proposal. In May
* 1963,. another representative of the same foreign govern-
ment made the same proposal tome. At that. ‘time, I
‘agreed to such.a proposal. " :
“In September 1963, I was informed by an American, ‘
‘known to me as an Agent of the same foreign government,
that arrangements for my participation in the aforementioned
- act were completed, At that time, I refused the aforesaid
proposal.
Approximately one week later,. 1 was instructed byt this
‘same person to either participate as previously agreed =
“or derrogatory information. pertaining to me would be 7
. ~disclosed to the Federal Bureau of Investigation. | There-
upon,.I agreed to follow the instructions-of this” person, —_
‘although-I did not intend to do so. This existing situation
actuated my conduct of. September: 20,. 1963, for which I
was arrested and am. presently charged. . .
I did not actually attempt to rob any bank, I thought that
/ my arrest.would provide an immediate, though temporary,
en _ , olution to the problem with which I was ‘confronted. ©
toa ; Iam not guilty as charged, tt

Bey _ 24 Jan 1964: . NAGELL arraigned in connection with indictment for
_ oe _° bank robbery and was committed for 30 days for the:
purpose of psychiatric examination.

9 June 1964: ° Sentenced i in U.S. District Court, El Paso, .Texas to
"serve 10. years, :

:

=. 17 June 1964: a NAGELL swallowed several sleeping pills while lodged

at the El Paso cern Jail.

-~4-



--- Page 18 ---
13-00000

‘FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"24 October 1997 °-

“MEMORANDUM FOR’ THE. RECORD.

SUBJECT:, NAGELL, Richard Cc.
- “RIN .0°264.170-

.On 23° ‘October. "1997, the “undersigned, met with. MY oo ced steeds
Gary “Brennianmen, » ‘Historical “Review “Group, | Central
Intelligence Agency and Ms.
Records Review: Board.

‘Kathleen M. Combs , Assassination

yng Combs reviewed the Office of Personnel
Security’: 8 eecurity. file of ‘Subject. oy

“oRs/ D/IMB

\
i
!
i
|.
re
r
i
!

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY



--- Page 19 ---
13-00000

- 9189 W8Od



--- Page 20 ---
13-00000

Men Americans suspect that a few Im. .

portant officials In Washington have
been having a grand old time tossing out
fibs on every conceivable topic. If you're one
Of these Americans, here at fast Is your
‘chance-to Join In the fun,

th( | temoving game, invented by two
engryy-ufessors, permits you to uncover an
entertaining variety of bureaucratic untruths
and win your way to the Truth Vault,

What's In the box? Two sets of cards — a
Citizens’ playing deck and en Administration
peck of flos, 4 tiberty-bell counters, 90 truth
trophies, dice, rutes and a colorful game
board richly sprinkled with amusing In-
scriptions.

Pleasantly competitive? Yea! Strategy? OF
course. Adult? Vary! — yet simpla enough for
8 -13-yeor old to enjoy a8 well, Two, three
or four can pley Individually or as teams.
Anyone ‘can came from behind to win with
dramatic suddenness, Game time: 30 to 90
finutes,

Price, $5.95 Uncenditionally guaranteed.
Smile and chuckle over the game for a week.
Then, If you can bear to part with It, return
It-and we'll send back all your money.

[7 Sucker eae Gowran

‘ AMHERST GAME COMPANY
.', Gox 5, South Pleasant Street
Amherst, Maes, 01002

Gentlemen: | enclose $5.95 plus 55¢
for paclioging and ebteping. ‘end im-
my CREDIBILITY GAP game.

it} so desire, I'll cond it beck at the
end of & woek end recelve prompt ro-

fund In full.

Address 7 .
City .

State. : Zip :

© Grr IDEA: Enclose $16.95 and we'll
6end.*hree copies of Credibility Gap —

“ing costs pald by us. You Save
yame refund guarantea,

|
| |
1% !
Im 1
i |
la
1 lame !
! i
1 !
! !
I i
! !
! i
1 |

ie ip Oe

4° RAMPARTS

brought in’ a rifie ‘to havé’a telescopic

-as late as November ; the man made him-

would remember ‘him if he galled bac

sight mounted; he produced a repair tag
in that name as ‘confirmation (Report,
p. 315). Garland G. Slack ‘and other
target shooters patronizing the Sports
Drome Rifle Range reported that.a man
resembling Oswald had practiced there

self obvious, at onc~time ‘incurring
Slack's displeasure by firing on his tar-
get (Report, pp, 318-319).

An incident at’ Downtown Lincoin-
Mercury. is: highly revealing. Immedi-
ately after ‘the assassination, salesman
Albert Guy Bogard reported to the FBI}
that a man giving the name Lee Oswald,
who closely resembled the accused as-
sassin, came into the showroom on No-
vember 9. Remarking that in several
weeks he would have the money to make
the purchase, he test-drove an expensive
model on the Stemmons Freeway at 60
to 70 miles an hour. Both Bogard and ,

another salesman, Oren Brown, wrote’| *

down the name Oswald. so .that they

A third salesman, Eugene M. Wilson,
recalled that when the man purporting —
to be Oswald was told he would need a
credit rating, he snapped, “Maybe I’m

‘PROTEST
BUTTONS!

NAPALM MAK MILLIONAIRES © 4
CAUTION: - MILITARY SERVICE MAY

BE HAZARDOUS TO YOUR HRALTH .*

“WHAT ME WORRY?" (photo LBJ grinning)

¢ SAVE LIVES NOT FACE * “HAD

ENOUGH?” (photo Reagan smiling) .* .
COME BACK TRUMAN, ALL-IS FOR-
GIVEN *-MY GOD 1S ALIVE, SORRY -
ABOUT YOURS « FS THERE INTELLI-

GENT LIFE ON FARTH? ¢ Teace symbat

* peace dove* or wreath®

SNOOPY SNIFFS AEROPLANE GLUE +
FLOWER : POWER" *.END POVERTY,
GIVE ME $10 « WE LOVE YOU, CHARLIE
BROWN * KEEP AMERICA GREEN,
PLANT GRASS* ¢ EVEN ILIKE SEX * A’
PILL IN TIME SAVES NINE * LOVE* ©
I'M NO. 3, I DON’T TRY AT ALL ¢ POT*
¢ CLEAN AIR SMELLS FUNNY © BAN
THE BRA * CHASTITY IS ITS OWN
PUNISHMENT ¢ LSD: FLY UNITED*. «
ZAP) YOU'RE STERILE® .
“Button has-groovy artwork.

co
Largest selection in U.S., OVER S00 TITLES
@ 25¢ each, $/$1, 200/§25. FREE LIST1.

POSTERS too! Rock groups, film stars,
psychedelic, ete. Stamp brings: list. =
ARIES

Aptos, California 98003

: ' Box 666R

"the most cogent confirmation for it isthe

_ a bank in El Paso, Texas, fired.a gun into.
_ the ceiling, and then sat outside waiting

| mits, But he had sent a registered letter
to J. Edgar Hoover warning him of the

@nanswercd,

_ cember 19, 1963, Nagell advised, “For

“City and in Texas” (CD 197), Another |”

buy a car” (Report, p. 320)

’ Given a lie detector. test by the FBI.
Bogurd’s responses were those “norma!
expected of d person telling the'truth
Nevertheless, the Warren Commistion’
dismissed the incident by noting that’
‘Oswald supposedly could not operate an
automobile and that on November 9 he
allegedly spent the day drafting -a
lengthy Ictter to the Soviet Embassy, It
evidently never considered the possibility ”
someone might be: impersonating “Os-
wald. But Bogard will never identify: ‘the ©
impersonator. He stuck to his story in
news interviews, and subsequently was
beaten to within an inch of his life by an
unknown assailant and arrested: by the
Dallas police on seemingly trumped-up
bad check charges. He retreated to his-
native Louisiana, where on St, Valen- -
tine’s Day 1966, he was found dead of .
eximust fumes in his automobile,

The main ingredients of the patsy:
theory are wrapped np.in.a story that has
gradually” filtered out of ‘Leavenworth
Penitentiary: The story is that of inmate
Richard Case Nagell, and paradoxically,

manner in which he wound up sentenced
to ten years in federal custody,

Nagel was a highly decorated infantry
‘captain in the Korean War who; he ©
claims, subsequently became a CIA
agent. It is a matter of record that in
1957 he was scriously injured in a plune
crash in Cambodin, which tends to sup-
port his contention, since Cambodin was
not exactly a tourist playground. On
September 20, 1963, Nagell walked into

to be arrested. He says he staged the
affair because he wanted to be incustody
as an alibi when the assassination took.
place. It wasa desperate measure, he ad-

impending assassination, which he'says
was then scheduled for the latter part of
September (probably the 26th in’ Wash-
ington, D.C.), and the letter had Gone

© There is an incredibly brief FBI inter: .
view report stating, in part, that on De-.

the record he would like to say that his
association with OSWALD (meaning:
LEE HARVEY OSWALD) was purely.
social and that he had met him in Mexico


--- Page 21 ---
13-00000

| 1964, he “made wild accusations to news-
| paper reporters, accusing the FBI of not

._SYMBO LS Ss.
International symbols of love and
peace, handsomely cast eng nung
trom Imported leather thong

of President Kennedy...” (CD 404).
. That the charges may not be so wild is
indicated by the faet that the government

threw the book at Nagell, a first offender

ARAQIAN LOVE OFLU
{BLU 2) Fradrelod
In deticately hand.
carved flowars.— $1.50

with discharging a firearm on govern-
ment-protected property. Since his sen-
| tencing, he has been shuttled between
Leavenworth ‘and the federal: medical
j center (a euphemism for mental.institue
| tion) at Springfield, Missouri. While the
government has suggested in court that

Heat gram his airplane crash : mentally affected.
stems (BMMNEE AD | Ei Nagel, the fast remains that he ‘was
mol ot | | happiness. under- [enameled on a given intelligence ing after the crash..

ground symbol of dellcat L
1 tve. 92.80 f secret meaning $1.40] les od chabe 63 $2.50 What Nagell alleges i$ damning not only ©

to the FBI, but to the CIA. In brief,
isempnenpeccocneesensoceensa

GUDIES HEART SHOP”
10512 Ast.Ave., Inglewood, Calif. 90303

$ am enclosing $— for

tion was Kennedy's move in the direction
ofa rapprochement with Castro, which

anti-Castro elements. As he puts it,

Mexico City, codename Bravo Club,

present” to be delivered September 26, a

approached Oswald while he was worke
ing at the Reily-coifee firm in New O:
leans in the summer of 1963, and a)

4 | patsy. When the “delivery” site was
4 | shifted to Dallas, Bravo Club enlisted

{| the aid of a Dallas “subsidiary,” Dela
‘| Club,
| Meanwhile the CIA got wind of the

| real.” Nagell says he was one of the

verified that the plans were authentic,

Now available! A persona! de- that | “‘gusanos {anti-Castroites} were

tailed account’ of the first ex-
perimental’ NUDE PSYCHO-
THERAPY marathon, written by
a participant,. reveals the hap-
_penings at a scientifically con-
ducted weekend session involv-
ing 3 nudists -and 17 non-
nudists. Only 4

4) sum of the plot was right-wing in nature.
if: Nagell says that he was instructed to
“arrow” the patsy, that is kill him, after
the assassination. At this point, he con-

“would rather be arrested” than commit
murder and treasosi,": he declared in a
self-prepared petition for habeas corpus.

In the petition, Nagell asserts that he
used.the pseudonyis Robert Nolan and

‘3436 FERNWOOD AVENUE DEPT. AME 1
“S95 ANGELES, CAL. 90027

8 repove states, that when the Prisoner was :
‘being led from court on’ January’ 24, -|

attempting to prevent the assassination -

who says he expected to b¢ charged only -

’ he says that the motive for the assassina- ° |

anti-Castro group in New Orleans and,
{ not into the hands of his-would-be exe:
decided to give Kennedy a “Christmas.

date that was postponed. ‘A party was %
} required. Two members of Bravo Club _

| pealéd to his ego in setting him up as the - |:

| plans and sent several agents into the |:
field to ascertain whether they were “‘for.

| agents dispatched. Within a short time,“
he claims, he was pulled in. It had been |

making the watch tick,” and that the:

| tends, he got cold fect and builed out, "I -

Joseph Kramer in the U.S. and three:

of the Defense Intelligence ‘Abea Hi
states that the files of the FBI-and th
CIA ‘contain information that Oswald:
was using the aliases Albert Hidel- anc
Aleksei Hidel. He charges that the: ‘FB
illegally seized from him evidence cricial
to his defense, such as notebooks con
taining the names of certain CIA em
ployees, photographs, two: Mexicar
tourist-cards (one in the name Joseph.
Kramer, the other in the name Albert.
Hidel), and receipts for registered. mail,
including the one for the Ictter sen’
Hoover warning-of the assassination;
When Nagell complains he has. beer
“salted away” because. of. what’, he
knows, he just might be making the
derstatement of the year.

[THE ELIMINATION OFA PATBY, ss
“Fr DIDN'T KILL ANYNOPY .. « ‘I'm just §
: a] a patsy,” Oswald shouted to news:

men while in ‘police custody. A.
marked patsy, contends Garrison—one
hos ot supposed to; shave! lived lon;
cnough to utter his cry of innocence. But:
| something had misfired, and.Oswald fell.

: cutioners, but into .the comparative:
safety of the Dallasjail. The denouemen
presented a crisis that the conspirators:
could solve only by pressing police buff :
‘Jack Ruby into service.
Although the Warren Commission:
‘concluded that Oswald ducked into his
Oak Cliff rooming house to pick up the *
° 38 revolver, later-confiscated from him*:
‘in the Texas Theater, it did not explait
why, ifhe had pone to work at the Schoo!
Rook Depository that morning intend
ing to kill the President ‘and escape,”
he did not take the revolver with: him.:
\; That he made-a beeline to his rooming
_ house'for the'sole purpose of getting the:
revolver speaks of a man who desper.
ately wanted to protect himself from.
treacherous comrades rather than from
=the police. Notwithstanding the mild re:
sistance he put up in. his refuge in th
Texas Theater, Oswald’s demeanor in
custody gave every indication that he
would resolve. the great riddle—given
Y the time, :
Oswald dees not appear to be the only
double-cross victim of that bloody after--
noon: the evidence is persuasive that.
’ someone other than the accused assassin
killed Officer J. D. Tippit, a friend of
Jack Ruby, whose patrol area included.
‘the Harlandale Street section headquar-.



--- Page 22 ---
13-00000

. Ta ararhe res —_ ; . -

| Of e Memoranda * UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT. —

i . . : .
7 ‘enabe, Research “ Section/CB/PSD DATE: 13 April 1958:

‘= GF+6-371, page 22

. As matter of information you, may be interested in know-
ing that the DDP. initiated a request through the CIA Library _ .
to obtain all newspaper clippings which pertain to. the death «
of Subject, “Miss Barbara Wade (X 2457) advised on 18 April |

_ 1958 that the Library has articles from: the Washington Post on

. March 14 & 163: New York. Times on: March: 16;/ New York Mirror: on?

“Marah 173 and Christian’ Science Monitor on Yarch his,



--- Page 23 ---
13-00000

2 | TOKYC, March 15 «The undergoing

' one of its intelligence agents,
~ whose body was found floating
"may have been

surance — policy
‘to his wife and

2 .
~ met_E. Dugan,

- His” body. was

Psychiatric treat:

ii id ‘today ment. an - ot
United States Army said to ay ‘As. usual, the Army main-
:tained silence on Dugan's work

in Tokyo Bay,

poisoned after
handing: his in- -
disappearing,
- M/Set. _
The Army said Dugan and his

wife, Maud, ecme to Tokyo Feb,
4 by train from Camp Zama’

» Of Craiton,
Pa, left his
wife Feb. i in :
a Tokyo‘ hote

with ‘the policy Dugan
and personal papers, saying:

f “If I don’t return, you'll need
these.”

had a pass to visit the capital.!
That night he left ‘his wife. She
said they planned to borrow

Wednesday... The

Army ‘said, the United Press
Teported. “Extensive pathologi-
cal tests will he conducted onjab:
body samples."] .

tio

near Yokohama, The sergeant! .: «0001 0 vc:=c05



--- Page 24 ---
13-00000

oe Ba Ne Fhines

HAR TS 7958

a |2 HUNTED IN TOKYO .
|) IN DEATH OF A G1:

Spreial to The New York Times, +
- TOKYO, March 14—TheTokyo
-. potice are reported to be scarch-
> ing for an unidentified ‘Chinese
- ;, and a. Caucasian foreigner in
!-connection with the suspected
Murder of a United States Arm
} sergeant assi
work, - a
.A body in civiltan ‘clothes
’ found floating -in Tokyo ‘Bay
Wednesday was identified this
morning as that-
| Emmet &,
. iy

!
1
i

lgned to Intelligence

Ta nm 3 ng from his
Anteligence unit in okohama,
twenty-five -.miles south of

Tokyo, since Feb, 4,

: Imac had been
oo jAn auto;
| {States
day sugested he had died before:

he was thrown into the water;

dead two weeks,

head, ; his

iM
Yibe

jad
of M/Sgt.y:

Dugan,_39 years old,!”

An examination indicated the|.

Except for a bruise on the fore-| :
body hore: no marks. :

of, external .Anjury, but there
WAS no.sea Water in his lung:
as ‘there “would” have ‘been ‘ha
he died of drowning, :

- Sergeant -Dugan's  w!
turned to the United Sta’
‘onday
Army. s
no

ifé | re-"
tes last
by military aircraft, An
pokesmian’ sald ‘he had
“definite “knowledge - that ‘
the sergeant. was .engaged’ in-
“investigative activity” at time:
of his death, He could have
bbery, he

en a. victim o
ded, *:

PSY conducted by United: - -
Army surgeons yester-:.



--- Page 25 ---
13-00000 .

i ‘Tokyo Bay Yields Body.
OF GI Intelligence Aide

“TOKYO, March 14 (Friday)|Tokyo. - The ‘Center coordi:

. in The body of a ay: intelle nates all United States: Armiy.
a . nite ates my telli: £
co [gence agent missing -since) Mslligence work in-Jepan,
Feb. 4, has been. found fot was not immediately released:

_fing in ie v Th ay e di ded Japanese newspapers quoted

said today. eh ae a {Police as saying the sergeant

it was possible that the agent)... investigating Communist

had been murdered. t of the activities in Japan at the time

-|. ‘The: body, fishe alien on of his disappearance, but the

Bay by. 2 aapanese, nn Army declined o-confirm this:

tatively. identified "as that. of The. Army spokesman. said

. , ;
fA ia master sergeant attached to fae nay was ash in

‘ore he entered the



--- Page 26 ---
o “rem 8 Ecol DENTIAL. BR. SECRET.
"ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET

EXTENSION | °

17 7 Apetl 1970

to whom. _ brow ° ine “across: Salumn “alte

TR 610 Mamet SECRET

[1 CONFIDENTIAL [7] Useonty CJ UNCLASSIFIED


--- Page 27 ---
13-00000 .. Lone aMEES Gee glee
_altered that he announced himself in oj.
“Communist. ‘He had made o1 foumens

WILLIAM RR. MARTIN
CouUnsELOR AT Law we
mTERMaTiOwsL TRADE Mal

new ORLEANS, LOUIBIANA 7

it a

> ehard Ce Nagel
i. Og Grand AverUS |
'. yeat, Tong Telen
York oe

: Mr. Nagel

i F4+a
bo g ered lettd
ie ister rave bes

on te
e tit foyt Ply i
on hyeatey
My tat Way,
Sern

.
‘ALD (meaning| 00 ne hk
If LD) wus purely “8eT eet
Social and that he had met him in Mexico, be

City and in Texas" (CD 197), Another J

when the prisoner wast:

ie
ng out

+ uted by the
Wiinked Onwata

ON res ame

ranks

“gs cory



--- Page 28 ---
13-00000 _

28 January. 1970
Mashington, Ds Cc.

An. editor of a trade journal, whom I first: ‘met while on
‘an intelligence asvignment in Latin America, has urged me:
for some time to’ make public, the facts dealing with ny:
involvement in. a! conspiracy. to murder the late Chief
Executive, » ‘John F. Kennedy, in 1963 and the circumstances -

surrounding. my arrest and imprisonment ‘in the. United States.
‘and -East. Germany. For reasons, ‘that, are more: ‘personal than -
dvidable I ‘can think of little else “that I would like to. do.
better.” Bat with, the- copious amount | of documentation and
-) background material on hand, ‘that I feel should be ‘adduced
» to in any valid treatise. of. the subject, it would require
writing no less’ ‘than a ‘tome, an undertaking for which I an.
“hardly. qualified. _ Then, too, there is a growing, ‘ekepticism

on. my ‘part concerning the kind of: reception ‘that ‘a topic. of

” this sort would elicit. ‘from a society long since inured to

P “violence, corruption and injustice. still, after over six” . oe

ears of Yelative Silence, I've decided that I must say 2

something about all . this, if only to ‘answer the lies and —

distortions. concocted about me. in ‘the press.. Thus, I have...
_compiled ‘this ‘small ‘booklet, a throwaway, . which “may be

easily. discarded | “at the | whim of the reader. In it ‘Tive
‘taken the liberty to set forth a reproduction of one of the .

‘ledat sanitized references to my cease that has appeared ine

he news media, ‘an. article. printed ‘Vast ‘summer ‘in the |. wes
‘ OVERSEAS FAMILY, ¢ a weekly tabloid. éatering to U. “Se service- “ATMs
men in Europe. rT have: utilized this perticuler article as a B

-yehiele “to tell” a, bit of ny. side

"by. writing ano :

; addendum to it

“Re Ge Nagell: =


--- Page 29 ---
13-00000 _

age 12

» “2 we

- claims, because he had refused -to

UNCLE SAM has given Richard Case
Nagell three Purple Hearts-— one:
eorned on Christmas Day — and a medal -.

for heroism in combat.

But what this ox-Army counterspy ond.

alleged CIA undercoverman wants is that
Uncle keep a promise to locate his wife

* and two small children.

The 38-year-old former officer hasn't

. seen them since 1963,

Officials inside the Federal Govern-
ment — most likely FBI and CIA agents
— know where they are and deliberately
isolated him from his family, the toll, lean
chain-smoker claims.

Nagell became separated from his
Japonese-born wife Mitsuko Takahashi
and their children, Teresa, now 9, ond Ro-
bert, now 8, when he was arrested for.
robbing an El Paso, Tex., bank in Sep-
tember 1963. .

He staged the robbery and immedi-

ately surrendered to the: police;. Na: ell
ii
Kennedy-assassin Lee Harvey Oswald and

for

was afraid he. would be killed himself,
The ex-Army captain was convicted of
the crime ond sent to Leavenworth, but

_ Mrs, Nagell was never told where he was, -

Sinea then Nagell has been written

- about in national American magazines

and has worked his way inside a politi-

‘cal prison in Communist East Germany
the CIA, : :

Two major magazines intimated thot
: Nogell had been insane.
jew Orleans district attorney Jim Gar-
rison allegedly intetviewed Nagell three
times in his controversial probe of what
- he called the plot to kill Kennedy.
However, despite all the publicity
about Nagell, no public mention has
been made of his charges that:
- © FBI special agents who questioned
Mrs. Nagall about her husband while he
was in prison said they didn't know
where he was; - an
. » The CIA used the promise of reunit-
ing Nagell with his family as part of the
incentive for him to undertake a one-man

nt to find my children’
Ex-Army spook who fingered Oswald claims Uncte Sani hides his family /.by Thomas CLucey. -

_-CIA assignment inside Eost Germany.

Nagell came to Europe in February
1969 on a hunch that the path to his fam-

ily started in West Berlin. In Zurich hewas
a .

éost killad, he says. la Barcelona, he

was watched, And in West Berlin he was

attacked in a side-street: bar by two.
strangers —- one of whom had been fol-
lowing him for two days — and hit on
the top of his head -so hard a molar
cracked in half. :

Fearing that the next attacker might

_ murder him and reassured that the Gov-

ernment would Finally “keep its promise
this time, Nagell flew home to the United

Now he's back ‘where he started in

‘States.

1963 — when he tipped off the Fal that:
Oswald was planning to assassinate Pres-

ident Kennedy. .
Working through a source with access
to. documents on the Nagell case, The
FAMILY has been able to reconstruct this
incredible story of the spy who couldn't
come in from the cold, .

ICHARD CASE
Nagell first went

gust 1962.
“Some publications have

" fdentified him as a CIA agent,”.

‘ . the FAMILY source sa!

. "But
Nagell never claimed to be a

--CIA agent. For the year that!

he worked off and on for the

-CIA the first time, he wast

. Never told what he was, But it.
~ was In the capacity of an in=

‘vestigator or informant.” .
‘Nagell had 8 good back-

"+ ground for Investigative and

i

undercover assignments.
In the Army, he was a CIC

Id Operations Intetligence in

; Japan and Korca.

He had made captain with a

~battlefield commission during
-the Korean War at the age of .

22 — possibly the youngest man

;to carn that distinction, Nagell
‘served two volunteer combat
tours as an infantryman in Ko- °

rea, signing up for the second’
288 soon as he returned to the

~ States from the first. It was in
Korea that-he won the Bronze -,

Star and three Purple Hearts.

Copyright 1969, Thomas C.:

Lucey. Reproduction in whole
or in part strictly prohibited:

x to work for the.
q \\ CIA as an ine
formant in “Au-

During a subsequent tour in -
the Far East with the CIC and

FOI, Nagell met and married
his Japanese wife In the spring
of 1959. Belng married to a
foreign national meant an
automatic removal from intel-
Ngence work so Nagell decided
to leave the Army. : :

For two years he was a Cal-
Hornia state special investiga
tor, working on fraud cases and
liquor violations. .

in the summer of 1962 he left
that job to work for the CIA.

His Jast assignment was te

penetrate the Fair Play for-

Cuba Committee, where he met
Oswald. Nagell also briefly in-
vestigated Oswald's Russian-
born wife Marisa. .

Nagell considered Oswald ”

intelligent, “but some right-
wingers were using him by
feeding his ego. They made
him think he was a big man,
important. Oswald himself was
definitely a left-winger, Jean-
ing toward Mao or maybe even
Castro, He wasn't pro-Moscow.

-He hated the Russians,

“And when Oswald sald he

was going to do something, you

+ Nagell, “We will kill him be- -

without the prior written pers _
; mission of the author. -

knew he meant it.”
In September Oswald told

fore the month {3 out.”
The “we,” according to Na-
gell, were Oswald and two Lat-.

‘Ins’ — possibly Cubans — who

belonged to anti-Cestro organ-
izations inthe United Btates.
“Him” was President Kennedy.

Nagell reported the threat to
@ mari known only as Bob, his
CIA contact. According to The
FAMILY's source, “Nagell's in-
structions were to take care of

Oswald's assassination plans to
Hoov

‘Oswaid, He told him he wasan ©
intelligence man, not a killer, -

and he couldn't kill Oswald.
*Threats were made to Na-
ll which indicated to him that
e had better do what he had

been instructed to do,

“Instead, he wrote about’

FBI director J. Ed;
in Washingto:

gar er
nm. Hoover didn't

reply, but Nagell didn’t expect ©

be arrested. He expected to be

held briefly for discharging a -
firearm on Federally insured

Property. By that time the as-

sassination would be over and |

he'd be safe.

Apparently Nagell felt police
custody would keep him safe
from the CIA and from the
assassins, He ‘feared the CIA
because he didn't “take care
of” Oswald. He feared the

_tentiary,” the source 3:

led.

“All you have to do Is! be
there.”

The source continued: |.

“In

She

1966 Nageil'’s sister _-
- wrote that she had hed a
‘letter from his wife.
- wanted to. know where jher

husband was and why-hadn't .

ahe heard from him.
“Here is the sticky,
Mra. Nogell’s letter al

Richard Nagolll: a solft-doluclod ements |

him to. He wanted that letter
&s a matter of record.

“-“After Nagell's tip, the FBI
questioned Oswald and re-

leased him as not being a

danger or a threat.”
Two months later Nagell

heard: the assassination news —~

bulletin on the radio. “The FBI
screwed up!” he explained.
“That was Oswald!” This was
before there was any public
mention of Oswald. :
“After the assassination the

‘FBI tried to clean their skirts,”

The FAMILY was told. "FBI

- agents insisted to Nagell that ~
_ he hadn't told them this about |
Oswald or that about Oswald.

But hehad.” _-

By this time Nagel was in|

Leavenworth penitentlary.

before what Nagell thought
wes to be. the assassination’
date, he went. into an El Paso
bank, shot one bullet Into the.
ceiling and waited outside to

~ attorneys,”

“On Sept, 20, 1963, six days eaty “

assassins bécause he might be

considered one of them.
But the police held Nagell
longer than six days, :

He was tried twice, in May‘

- 1964 and September. 1966, for

attempted robbery with force
and violence and sentenced to
the maximum of 10 years.

of court-appointed
The FAMILY'’s
source sald. “In effect, this de-

control

nied him counsel. of his choice -

~ -@il during prison.” -

| Ae Prisoner A-83286-L, Na- ©

lowed to write to

ation why he wasn't allowed
mail from or to his wife and

children, “They don't explain
_ to you in Leavenworth peni-

‘only his, sister and a friend. ©
‘He couldn't get an explan-"" |

“the FBI had questioned her

- $20 bills.

few days before about her hus-

-band’s activitles in the Army.
. “The FBI knew where Nagell-
“was but didn't tetl his wife.”

The letter had been sent

{rom a Hollywood post office ~ -)
. box and Nagell tried unsuc-
x + cessfully to trace it after he
“I was bum-rapped," Nagell .
. complained. . °
“The court instructed that
-. any attorneys retained by his
relatives would have to come *_
‘under the supervision and--

got out of Leavenworth.
On April 29, 1968, after 4'/a

acquittal on appeal and flew
to New York. .
."“We pulled a lot of strings

man who met Nageli when he
landed ‘at Kennedy Airport.

“The man and his nontalking
. partner gave Nageil §600 in .
will come -
‘where this comes from,” the

“Mote

* to get your freedom,” said a’ -.”

unidentified man promised. .

“We appreciate your cooper-
ation in prison.” -

- “To this day,” the source © -
told ‘The FAMILY, “Nagell .

oat

* years in prison, Nagell was re- 7 os .
* Jeased after he had won an


--- Page 30 ---
13-00000.

CAST OF CHARACTERS: :”
. Richard Nagell was ques: ©
tloned by New Oreans :
D.A, Jim Garrison because
Nageli claims he fingered
Kennedy assassin Lee Har-
.. vey Oswald while working
for the CIA, Nagell. also
* says U.S, Government offi.
ciala Isotated him from his

still has’ not got the money ~
Promised him. for his im-~°
in the United:

Prisonment
States.”
In New York Nagel ‘kept an

: appointment with a CIA offi-

cial he knew only as Buchel.
The CIA official told Nagel! he
had heard that his wife had di-

voreed him while he was in-
. Leavenworth,

“I might be true," the source

Richerd Nagel!

through: East Germaniy: and-he
would be arrested.

“The main objective of his
. twofold; .
One concerned a U.S. naval

imprisonment was

officer who had allegediy de-
fected and Nagell had to find
out If he ‘was there, But his
main purpose: was to: get as

much information as possible -

on techniques of interrogation
and methods of treatment of

two children atter the as-
sassination.

~ were: talking about. So they”

took him off the train because
he didn't have a, valid transit

. visa,

“They drove to Erfurt (an
East German city), where Na-

getl was held for three days In *

a safe house (a private home’

- used as a cover for intelligence

purposes). There some men in

* civilian" clothes - questioned

Nagell.

>: the victim of dagger in-the-back CHA tactics?

* noted, “but wouldn't it be nice

for Nagell to know for sure.

He assumes his children are

etill with his wife.”
. Nagell- met Buehel to be

‘briefed foranother CIA assign-

ment,

Why did he go back to the.
CIA’

“1 was the only practical
thing for him. to do,”

financial situation."
Almost a. month to the day

after he arrived in New York
* Nagell jetted te Zurich. ~

- the -
“source sald, “because of his

the MfS (East German Ministry
for State Security).”
Everything -went according

to the CIA's plan—up to a

Point.
Pan purich, Nagell reported to
his. CIA contact in the Ameri-

can Consulate General. About.

the only thing the CIA agent

“ scems to have said to Nageli
was to.ask him the train com-: ©

partment number on his reser-

vation, Nageli told him, No. 46.
Early

June 10,

stopped after crossing the East

in the morning of -
1968, around 12:30:
, Gm, to 1:30 a.m. Nagell’s train

“months and he began to think

Next he was driven to an

East Berlin political prison for.

extensive Interrogatlon. They
accused’ him of espionage and
sald they were going to try
him.

“Nagel had been told that if
he was in East Germany for
over three months, his release
would be effected by the agen-
cy (CIA), but he was not told

how. On his own he started to |
play ‘crazy because he was -

there over four and 6 half

there was another reason for

“George Ra:

fied to him as
bruecke.”

Waiting to meet Nagell were,
according to the source:
’ @ Andor Klay, head of the-
Eastern Affalrs Section of the
U.S. Mission in Berlin; - |

” Sandkrug-

@ Wolfgang Vogel, a weil-
known East Berlin lawyer who
Participated on the Feb. 10,!
1962, exchange of Soviet master
spy Col Rudolf Abel and A-
mericen U2 pilot Francis Gary.
Powers and other spies and
accused spies:

e a wealthy
Washington lawyer, supposed-
ly “a representative -—not a
member—of the CIA";

@ Bruce A. Flatin, head of
the US ferlin — Mission's
public safety scction, allegedly
“a longtime CIA member—and
Flatin is not his real name";

@ Dr. {Capt — now Maj)
ond Babineau, a

ychiatrist ai |S. Army
hospital. in Berlin, who ap-
peared in civilian clothes, and

@ An unidentified man.

Nagell was. driven to. the

..ULS, Mission at 170 Clay Aliee

and interviewed by Babincau.

-“That was probably because -

Nagell had played crazy with

“ the East Germans,” the source

Nagett’s children

began feeling sleepy | and

“thought he was under the In-_

fluence of a drug. He went to”
the bathroom and looked at
his eyes {n a mirror. They were
almost pinpoints and hel was
feeling exceedingly nd he

“Back in the room he asked,
‘Did anybody put something
in my coffee?

“Dr. Babineaw said no;- New
said ‘nothing. Nagell began to
feel so sleepy he had td oc-
castonally stand up to stay a-
wake. Finally, he asked to be
examined by a civilian psychi-
atciat if there was any oe

. lon of his sanity.

“No, the doctor sald, " A tar

-as T'm concerned, you're | free

to go."

“New spoke to the doctor in
a comer — the doctor ‘kept:
shaking his head no —‘ and
then New told-Nagell, ‘I think
you ought to leave for: the
Uniled | States. ‘The’ German
newspapers are going to pick
this thing up any moment and
might want to talk to you. [
don't think you should talk to
them."

“Nagell sald he wanted to go-
back to Zurich first to pick up
his belongings — to be exact,
certain documents in a safe de-

“During his last week of German border. his being there. He felt the ssid. - posit box. Nagell keeps records,
discussions with Buehel and © “He could hear people get _ CIA had deserted him and Washington lawyer New was _ Plenty of them.”
another man in New York." on the train and clomp down ~ that, quite frankly, he had — also present. When Nagell was driven to

The .FAMILY's source said,
“It was Nagell's understanding
that he was to have himself
arrested by East German
authorities. All he had to do
was buy a train ticket from
Zurich, Switzerland, to East

Berlin. The train would go

the aisle, directly to his com-

. partment,” the source sald..

‘“There were two men in unl-
form and two men in civilian
clothes. They asked Nagell for
his passport—by name. Thert

they asked for his transit visa. -
He didn't know what they

STER

been sent to Germany to get

him out of sight or to get rid

of him.

“He was released on October
23, He didn’t know he was go-
ing to be released until he was
taken out of prison and driven
to a Berlin checkpoint identi<

“Somebody brought Nagell
a cup of coffee,” the source
continued. “Nobody else had

- coffee. Nagell drank a small

portion of his coffee. It was
black but it tasted more bitter

* than ordinary coffee. Approxi-
mately five minutes later he

aGO CARTRIDGE STS 444-E°

one of the finest cartridges ever produced.

- Remember: Eloc created the first... the very

first.

See your nearest Audio Club or write to:

ALLIED. GENERAL STORE GMBH, 6451 WOLFGANGIHANAU, raoeroneaeet

« moving-magnet stereo cortridge. lt is the original,
basic, design principle now used by most, if not all, manufacturers of moving-magnet stereo cartridges today!

Strosie 11, Tel, 061 81/565 93

Tempelhof Airport, New ac-
companied him and walted un-
til he boarded the plane, Some
time during their talk New
asked Nagell about his disabil-
ity—Nageli was getting a 60
percent disabillty for service-

(Continued on Next Page)

|
i:
|
4
|
|
|
|



--- Page 31 ---
13-00000
h Newest -
a and

| ‘Bad Aibling.

i Baden-Baden |

-_s “Berlin:
| -Bitburg .

a 4 ‘Darmstadt. .

-jp Herzo
“18 Incirlik

-e O'gau
H Rothwesten
-& ‘Stuttgart

_& Wiesbaden
; Your Audio Club hes the Ham om om oon on oa

1 ‘NEW 110-WATT SCOTT 342C

i The World's | Most _ Advanced Receiver

instant servicing!

“Wire-wrap™
connections
aileamete
wolder pointat

thanks to ‘Scott's newly developed assembly
inted cirevit modules snap into the main chassis for

New F'C/O circuitry - for virtuolly distortion free listening, even.
a1 low volume levels. Extra power, especially when you connect
i ‘extra speakers, Scott also features a silver-plated FET front end,
i Integroted Circuit IF strip, IC preamplifier, Fer fone control and
all-silicon output circuitry.
GET FULL DETAILS AT YOUR AUDIO cus
AND CHECK THE AMAZING LOW MILITARY PRICE!

HSCOTT

Scot International, Maynard, Mass. 01754

eT eA EARN ASA ANA

‘You must get ‘out of Bexlima!”

(Continued From Page 13)

" connected injuries -—- and New.
* promised him help in getting a

disability retirement.

“But,” the source added, New
‘also told Nagell: “Of course,
this (offer of help in getting a
disability retirement). is pred-
icated on your ‘staying away
from the news media." .

On the afternoon flight to
Stuttgart Nagell feli asleep,
convincing him that he had

given a drug ora bar-
biturate.

Because of fog he didn't get
to Zurich until 4 a.m. and “he
was feeling extremely sick,” the
source sald. “He rested for a’
few hours and went to the U.S,

' Consulate General. New had

told him to stay away from the

‘consulate in Zutich because’
* ‘they will: question you and
_ send it to Washington.’ Nagell

couldn't understand New's rea-
soning, but he went to the

«consulate to get a doctor, not to
tell them about Berlin, He was
+ drastically sick and wanted .

doctor He thought he was dy:
ing.” =
’ Referred. to a civilian doctor,
Nagell was told “he had been
given an overdose of Seconal, .
a most potent sleeping drug.”
Nagell was sick for about six
days.
Meanwhile, he was also walt-
ing to hear from New, who had _
promised to phone him in two ~

AAMT ANN I

or three days. Nagel had told
him he wanted the search for
his family to be agreed upon
before he returned, to the
States.”

Twice Nagell called New's
room at the Berlin Hilton. First
New was “unavallable,” then
he had checked out for the U.S.
(Later, back in Washington,

» New allegedly explained it had

been “unadvisable” to go to Zu-
rich because the East Germans

might have tapped his phone |

and he didn't want them to
_ know Nagell was there. Nagell .
didn't buy that.)
‘With New hot showing up to
- discuss the search for his faml-
jy, Nagell violated his instruc-
tions and went to the consulate
for hel;

ip. t
On his first visit Nagel found

“they had a classified file on
him and knew he had been in
. East Berlin,” the source con-
tinued. “But he refused to an-
swer questions about his Im-

prisonment and told them about |

New’s promise.

“The next time, he told the
consulate he was angry that he
had not heard from New and
that if he didn't get help he was
going to the news media. This
is when he was offered State

Department help in locating his ~

family — predicated on his
early return to the United
States. Nagell agreed and flew
back to New York.”

In New York, Nagell waited
about two or three weeks to

hear from the State Dept. When"

he didn’t he contacted a State

. Dept, agency in New York and

‘was allegedly told that a letter
would be sent to Washington.

“That was the last time Na-
gell heard from them,” the
source said. “He never received

a copy of the letter to Washing- .

ton, as promised, and they were
always unavailable when he
called.”

‘Meanwhile, Nagell was see-
ing New in Washington and
called in person at the State

“They told him that the
“State Department didn’t have
the facilities to search for the
children,” the source sald, “but
on account of the circumstances
surrounding the case and ‘be-
.cause one of our employes ap-
parently made a promise in Zu-
ich, they would conduct a
search for his children and de-
termine whether he was mar-
ried or di
- *He never heard from them
again. When -he called they
were quote unavailable un-
quote.”

Through a lawyer in New's
office, described as a luxurious
suite visited by Pentagon of-

ficers in civillan clothes, Nagell -

got an appointment.at the VA

Physical with his clothes on,”
according to the source, “Two
hours later he was awarded a
-100 percent disability aliow-

“Nagel went back to New
and told him they wanted to -
tag him (Nagell) with a nervous
condition to destroy his credi«
bility.”

For good reason, Nagell wor-
ried that-a nervous conditien
might be used to tag him as a
nut who didn't know what he
was talking about.

In July 1968, while Nagell
was in the Communist prison,
Edward Jay Epstein, author of
a book on the Warren Com-
mission, wrote an article in
the New Yorker magazine at-
tacking New Orleans District
Attorney Jim Garrison's ine
vestigation of the Kennedy: as-
sassination.

Epstein described Nagell as

for “a-two-and-a-half-minute’

ance for a nervous condition.”

“another witness found in the
mail (of crank letters, publicity
seckers and bogus tips)... an

- intmiate of-a Federal institution -

for the criminally insane in
Springfield, Miss,... court
records indicated ‘that Nagell:
had suffered brain damage in.
an airplane crash in 1957.”

Nagell’s rebuttal:

@ He was sent to the U.S.
Medical Center for Federal
Prisoners in. Springfield to
determine whether he could
stand trial and when he was
up for parole;

'@ On each ‘occasion he ‘was
found mentally competent;

@ In 1954 (not: in 1957), he
was the only survivor of a
BS2 crash at Baltimore's
Friendship’ Airport (not in
Cambodia, ‘as reported in Ram-
parts magazine by former FBI
agent William W. Turner); *

@ After hospttalization he
returned to Army Intelligence
“School, received .a top éecret
clearance and wae assigned to
the Cic;

@ A June 17, 1986, psychiatric .

report ‘from the Springfield
Medical Center stated there
Jwas no “evidence or finding
“ suggestible of brain damage.”

All this runaround in
Washington convinced Nagell
that no one in the States was
going to help him find his
family, He decided to return
te Europe. -

Dra Zoorieta
SOmoono
‘tricd .

Go Estill Cais

-German when he saw onc

Kenneth HIN In the passport
section.

"A week or two later,
source continued, “they finally
got confirmation from Washing
ton that they had been unable
to locate Nagell's children so
far but were continuing 4 elr

“ ¢ finally agreed to go
back to the States as long as
the State Department was con-
tinuing their efforts.”

Pointing out that he had
“spent a great deal of his money
“running around," Nogell asked
for Government transportation
home ‘and was refused.

On April 19 or 20 Nagell
ized he was undcr surveillance.

“Around 10:30 on the night
of April 22, Nagell .was walk-
ing ‘down Xurfuerstendaim
when he lost his tail," ithe
source continued. “They ey, ut
disappeared. He didn't try, to
lose them,

“Nagell then went down a
side street and into a small res-
taurant with a bar.

“He ordered a beer and was
standing at the bar, talking to
a guy on his right, when he
saw the door open and {wo
men came directly toward him.

“Nagell was getting ready to
tell the men he didn't api is

something out of his pox

and swing at him, Ragelt

tumed and was hit on the back

of the head.” te
Police took Nagell to the

Albrecht Achilles Hospital

When he told the Gérmans|/he

“thought he had been hit |by

the CIA, “they called jan
American from the CID, a
British representative (p-
parently the side street was in
the British Sector) and a mem-
ber of the Berlin political
police.”

Around midnight Nogell
went to the U.S, Mission and

‘ asked for Hill in the passport

TAT TATA

On Feb. 21 of this year he
flew trom Mexico City .to
Zurich. But the vice-consul who

had promised State Dept. help.

Jast fall was no longer there. .

Nagell asked for the man he
claimed to be the.CIA station
chief. He, too, was gone.

Sent to the consulate's politl-

eal section, Nagell told them |

of the promises he'd ‘been

given and threatened to go to
Swiss newspapers about a
CIA agent in Bern, the Swiss
capital.

“A member of the consulate

asked Nagell to give them two ~

+. weeks and telexed Washing-

ton,” the source said. “But then
‘one night there was an at-
tempt on Nagell’s Ilfe and he
left for Barcelona the next
lay.

“There he contacted the U.S,
Consulate General and told
them why he had left Zurich
and asked that Zurich's reply
from Washington be sent to
Barcelona.

“Nagell was in Barcelona for

«two weeks, But then he real-
ized he was being watched and
left to see an ex-Army inteili-
gence officer at the American
. Embassy in Madrid. .

“Again he stayed for two
_ weeks. The embassy gave him
“no satisfaction, not even telling
him what Washington had
said. So he decided to go back
to: Berlin where this thing
started and made some prom-
. ises to himself — one of them
* being that If he didn't find his
children he would go to the
news media.”

section. Instead, he got the
Army staff duty officer and a
CIC agent.

“He gave his bloody shirt
and T-shirt in a bag to the
CIC agent,” the source sdid,
“and told him to give it to Hill.

“‘If something happens! to
me,’ he told the agent, ‘the
responsibility is going to |be
pinned because I'm going] to

the papers.’

“Back in his hotel, Nagell
‘was worried that he was going
to be killed.” i
In the morning: he went! to
the Army hospital and then to
Hill in the consulate.

“Hil had the bloody cloth-

Ing. ‘You must get out of
Benine he told Nagel. ‘We
cannot give you protection
here. The German police think
it's either mistaken identity or
the MIS."

“‘Last night I thought some-
body wanted to kill me,’ Nagell
replied. "Now I take it as (only)

> @ warning.’*

(Later, Hill told The FAMILY
he considered Nagell merely
“a private American citizen
traveling abroad." He added:
“Ninety-nine and a half per-
cent of his story Is fantasy.”
Hil confirmed that he had re-
ceived Nagell's bloody clothing
and that Nagelf had come to
him with a stitched-up head
wound, But he would only
say that the attack “is his
story, not that I have any

* other story about it.”)

He was referred to Andor-

Klay and Bruce Flatin, two of
the men who had met Nagel
when he came from East
Berlin, and eventually to a

But shortly after that Nagell
was placed on orders as an

- ambulatory patient and sent on

the Berlin duty train to Frank-
furt. His orders also put him
on a military flight back to the
States.

That's where he apparently
is now,

But he SAIN doesn't know if
he's married or divorced and
the whereabouts of his iil-
dren,

7
i sieamamssereneeotnsntieitenuiermmticcetta ent gt

smatestamn tc gatetenenenasmanaaresoasreeusecmanmreanenetinenaner iawn ote ster

cna cmearnN coos SHSATScc



--- Page 32 ---
13-00000

a! _which in my opinion reflect adversely on the whole.

ae eee vy ae UN EHOBAD  FANiLI arvicié. i have not Boughi to Feiucs or

“"cgonfirm each and every assertion made ty ite author,. Thomas C. Lucey. Mr. Lucey, despite

his citing a’ substantial number of inaccuracies, has nonetheless depicted a vast area of
what may be termed the fundamental truth. With this in mind, I-have tried to set|the
record straight only insofar as it pertains. to “those inaccuracies ~ and omissions

In order to view Mr. Lucey' s account in a somewhat different perspective, I shall
begin by advising that I first went: to work for the Central Intelligence Agency much
earlier than August 1962. It was during the winter of 1955-56, while assigned as a Gase
Review Officer with the Counter Intelligence: Corps at Los ‘Angeles, that I was initially
recruited into. the CIA's farflung network.of informants and agents, one of a. number; I

:.. suppose, within the Defense Department's .intelligence community who helped the Agency '

keep an eye on its not always tame competitor. My recruitment ‘was, handled by a Herbert

" Leibacher, ‘an agent of the ClA's Los Angeles office, and a Joe DaVanon, later identified.

ite me through photographs. as en official from CIA headquerters, then located on|"E".

‘tetreet’ in Washington, D.C. Motiveted by a degree of naivete and the. Agency's subtle

reminders’ that I owed a greater duty to my country than to the military establishment | I

_ leerved as a: non-paid, confidential informant off and on until amy resignation from |the
'Army.in October 1959. A complete destription. of the information I supplied to the Agency

‘during my nilitary. career would only add to what must perforce become a lengthy addendum;
‘may it suffice to say chat it_.did not always seem germane to intelligence affairs, |but
when it did it. consisted mainly of an assortment ‘of data that for so-called discretionary.

reasons was seldom passed on to the. Agency. (or for that matter, to our own hi sher

-- echelons). through regular channels. ~

Mr. Lucey's statement, "Being married “to a foreign national meant an automatic
removal from intelligence work so Nage]l decided to leave the Army," is. misleading jand
incorrect in its entirety. The only military intelligence organization from which. an
individual is normally -removed subsequent to marrying a foreign national is the cre -
primarily a security type orgen = and this rule does not necessarily apply when the agent
is an enlisted man or warrant officer. . As a commissioned officer, I was declared.
ineligible for further duty with the CIC effective 14 April 1959, a full year after my

‘marriage to a foreign national. I was not barred from assignment to other, even nore :

sensitive, MI organizations such as Field Operations’ Intelligence, then the clandestine |
‘espionage department of military intelligence. . As for the reasons I left the Army, they

- were clearly if euphemisticelly explained in my second letter of resignation, dated. ~
91 August 1959, namely: © "I desire to tender my resignation because I wish to fur ther my

civilian education. It. is not possible for me:to pursue the curriculum of which” ¥ am7"*
- desirous while on active duty. Also, compessionate reasons of a perronal nature exist

for desiring to tender ay resignation at this time."

My patronege under the CIA did not end with my. discherze from the Army and ensuing .-

:. employment in. December 1959 as an investigator for the State of California; in fact,

-henceforth I was offered. remuneration for my services, however nominal it sometimes was.

oo ‘What my new .taske . comprised - .of no real pertinence to this addendum or to later

developments, except perhaps | * nention that one of my. contacts said he worked out of :
"Domestic Intelligence," poeeibly the forerunner of. the present-day Domestic Operations
Division, which illegally keeps tabs on a wide range of American civilian organizations

“and activities. -I should elso point out that I did not quit my position with the State:

of. California “to work for the cIA," as implied by Mr. Lucey. I was dismissed, in June

£1962, at my own option and in my opinion for doing my job. (The following month I wes

‘shot. through the right chest during an altercation with a person whose identity I have ©

never ‘disclosed «4... . not through the left chest by myself, my wife, an Alcoholic

.Beverage Control. inspector ‘then under investigation or by a Los Angeles police officer

- "Decause. of -communistic . implications,” as ; has been reported at verious times by various”.

sources).

For the “next yesr, from. approximately the middle of August 1962 until my arrest in ©



--- Page 33 ---
13-00000

"Texas on 20 September 191 I was employed . by. the ‘ngency” in-a. capecity which can be
a¢curately described as that of an egent, in every sense of the word. My assignménts -
) varied and necessitated travel to three Latin American nations. and. many states, including
_ the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.- They also necessitated my taking on cover employment
» for one week in’ New York and for about ten weeks in.Los Angeles, though usually I vent
“as a tourist, an investigator for’ the Immigration & Naturalization Service or as a
-researcher for a private firm, the appropriate credentials being furnished to me by | the
-CIA.. To sum it up briefly, I operated in Mexico City at the onset of the Cuban Mis ile.
‘Crisis in-an effort aimed chiefly at. the Soviet government; I conducted inquiries
relative to "dissident": members © of several Cuban refugee groups based in the United
States; I checked out’ an’ alleged connection between a Miami resident named Eladio Del
Valle and New Orleans CIA informant Sergio Arcacha-Smith; I investigated an associate of
_the now deceased right-wing .extremist David Ws Ferrie of New Orleans, as I aid [the -
-activities. of left-wingers Vaughn L. Snipes’ and his wife,  Priscille, near ~ Venice,
‘California, and others; I conducted a surveillance:on 4 man, said to have been an ex-CIA .
_ employee, observed talking to MRP leader Manuel Artime and former Cuban senator/racketeor |
: Rolando Masferrer; I. inquired into an allegation that Marina Oswald intended. to divorce’
“her husband and return to the U.S.S.R. (although I never stated that I. met her personally, -
468 was reported by the FBI and Secret Service); and I performed courier duties and acted |
“as a cut-out. At the. time of my arrest I was operating in an undercover role, having
“become ‘involved in a. domestic-inspired plot to assassinate President Kennedy and, —
leastwiae ostensibly, other highly-placed government officials. a . -

7 Ur. Lucey goes on. to state that my last: ‘eesignment, at: the ‘time "was to penetrate the
Fair Play for Cuba Committee, where he met Oswald." Such statement is also incorrect.| -I
‘was never a member, .bona-fide or otherwise, - ‘of the FPCC. And my conversations with: PCC :

'. functionaries like’ Steve’ Roberts, -an -official of the. ‘Socialist Workers Party at Loa...
Angeles, could hardly: be construed as a ‘penetration. : Furthermore, I had been introd ced -
to Mr. Oswald long: ‘before the FPCC came ‘into. existence, albeit under an assumed name. .

‘AS to the’ allueion, that. I. “told “®Bob" I was an intelligence man, not” a killer
‘therefore: I couldn't: kill -Mr.: ‘Oswald, while the reference is true its connotatio
| deceptive. ‘I had killed before and I had participated in homicides under the auspices) of
both MI and the CIA (one instance being the part I. played in the February 1958 abduction- m4
" interrogation-murder of an FOI agent, a U.S. soldier, MSGT Emmett E. Dugan, from Crafton, ©

“Pas, suspected of: having defected in place to the Chinese), under the guise ‘that; an |
American variation: of the Soviet “wet affair" was the. only alternative, that. it was”

‘either essential to some overall intelligence effort or in the best interests, of our,
‘national security.’ And it was a. similar~sounding’ argument, ‘ultimately reduced to a.
threat, that was advanced to me by Robert Greaham.as an incentive. to dispose of Mr. Oswald

jin September 1963. .. But my refusal to do so ‘had absolutely no bearing on “the reason for |
effecting my arrest in the ‘manner Ta chose,..nor did it engender” in me fear of reprisal by ‘;.
the CIA. : .

: Pertaining’ to my arrest.: and convictions at rst . Paso, Texas, which the officiel a
=8pokesmen and “the - press have so neatly labeled as being for “bank robbery," let one of |:
‘the government's own spurious records,.. the appelate court decision that finally yawned a!
_judgement of acquittal in my case, . give its version: "The charge was then, and is now, .:

“entering a federally insured bank with intent to rob." What the record aptly ignores is
‘the. fact that .two- juries, incensed | .by the prosecution's innuendoes in and out of the ©
-courtroom ‘(and ‘by the ramifications of perjured testimony and a false Bureau of Prisons ="
ireport made available to the jury during its deliberations at the second trial - though
never formally ‘admitted into evidence) that I was a Communist, no doubt. a very red spy,
ctwice convicted me. of having ,"intended" to take by force and violence one hundred dollars
worth of Travelers Cheques from a bank teller. .

I shall “not herein: attempt to. list even generally the injustices to which I-was-
liunjocted by a ‘sorrupt judicial system, nor shall I bother:to enumerate the cruelties



--- Page 34 ---
13-00000

S 7 2 ai ity AUARe Gada in Be Meavenweria jeu. HCNELOLY 6
aigat of them are 5 adequat, ra “detailed in my 1967 Memorandum in Support of Petition ; ifor
“writ Of Habeas Corpus, sworn to and subscribed before William R. Martin (a former member
of the CIA's Dirty Tricks Division, who by his own admission is still in "the reserved"),
But I shall opine that if President Kennedy had not met his demise when and where he did,

I would not have been brought to trial on charges of commiting: a felony.

While my return to the fold of the CIA in May 1968 may have been the only “practilcal ‘
“thing” for me to do, it definitely was not predicated on my financial situation, as a lfew..
old bank account passbooks will substantiate (I am not quite the mercenary that Mr. Lucey
hes: portrayed). Nor was it ‘because of any. peculiar allegiance to those who had tossed me :
on the scrap. heap for the sake of. “expediency 4t years earlier, love of country, masochis- |
‘tic tendencies or wont of further intrigue. . And’ while ‘it remains axiomatic in my. mind |:
that the sole ‘requisite for one's use by the Agency is his qualification to fit into .
whatever may happen to be.the scheme of things, even this did not apply in| my.
circumstance, not really. -I agreed to go back out into the cold, so to speak, strictly ~
, for Peracnal reasons and I think the explanation is wisely left at that for now. :

i My mission inside East. Germany - if indeed at was a mission - was neither as we 1.
i defined nor as elementary as Mr. Lucey has perceived. I am sure the CIA knows all|it-

, needs ‘to know about American defectors in Berlin and the modus operandi of the MfS. [In =
i fact, the mission was net directed against East Germany, per se. | Preparations bore the

, trademarks of an authentic, even typical, Agency project targeted in the main to another
nation. That I was unable to comprehend the German language, that I had been a recent,
-i unwilling guest of the U.S. Attorney General, branded a Communist in the public records,
etc., merely served to strengthen an already plausible cover built up by chance rather .
than by design. Paradoxically, the chinks. in. the armor were that the cover was not
wholly untrue, ‘the MfS (unlike the FBI) not in the least irresponsible to the laws and
policies of its government. In the past I had engaged in certain covert intelligence
activities hositie to other socialist states, to. which - as an integral part of|my ©
cover - I freely confessed. Oddly enough, ‘however, my mentors from Langely had neglected
to tell me during the briefings that these previous activities constituted a violationjof
the criminal statutes of the GDR, warranting @ maximum penalty of death upon conviction. *:.
| By inadvertence or by plan I found myself ina not altogether unfamiliar predicament. If.
aot had confensed to my real mission,: assuming that it was genuine, . without doubt I would
| have been spared execution, probably even escaped long-term imprisonment. . Instead, | I
selected what I considered to be a better alternative... . and gained my freedom. As
‘for ny treatment by the MfS,. from begining to end it was far more ) gentle than that
“; experienced beneath the cudgel of the Ue S. Department of Justice. ov slonamenarstt ae

With regard to my marital status and my.children, the foremost area that Mr. Lucey
va ‘appears to have exploited, I have never claimed that "Uncle Sam hides my, family" or
| ptated that FBI and CIA agenta- ‘deliberately isolated me from my wife and children; nor
have I claimed that the Agency used the promise of reuniting me with may family as part of
ithe incentive for accepting the assignment in the GDR. My accusations in this respect -
| entered around my children and they were leveled at. the State Department as the result ~;-
ob of. a promise made to me shortly after my release from the GDR. Since returning to the =.
| United States last spring a reliable source has informed me that my wife was granted a. =.
' tinal decree of divorce at some period during my imprisonment in the USA and ‘although I. |
‘Yhave never deon seryed with a copy of the decree or other notification of divorce (or -~:
notice ofa divorce hearing). I, 80@ no cause to dispute the advisement... : ; . Oe

3 Lastly, concerning the aspersions cast on my sanity, ‘at this writing permit me to:
“\pay ‘only that. I have never. in my life been certified psychotic by any U.S. medical ~°
jauthority or adjudicated. mentally-incompetent in a.court of law, notwithstanding the .
‘conflicting legal: and medical opinions as to my mental condition on the day of my arrest

‘da Texas, over six years ago« ; . . .

| : wo a a a



--- Page 35 ---
13- 00000

~ ‘CaBLE’SECRETARIAT DISSEMINATION
7] PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED -- me

~ ~ -
x Aovancz'conv-. [] ;

2 HAD APPROACHED THEM. “AND: > MADE. I

Se FILE “201- 146537.



--- Page 36 ---
13-00000

a aXe

a TeriasN

; OFFICERS |
af. ‘1

___ COORDINATING:
, RELEASING OFFICER -

ore SECRET. fo
oe “ REPRO! DUCTION. BY-OTHER THAN. THE ISSUING OFFICE Is

‘AUTHENTICATING =. |
declassitication Peart

PROHIBITED. comno. 2


--- Page 37 ---
13-00000

“ROUTING. AND/OR. INITIALS «.SEEN.BY....

tee ep
| LOS Det
“Bee TR
PIS ee
tS 7.

PCR, CCH CHE

Re . : 7 rr . a « iP t- not :
RELEASING OFFICER: oe . ded AUTHENTICATING .
i. : onees | . : demmaroding and . OFFICER, °°

ol - REPRODUCTION By OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE Is PROHIBITED. . Se Copy No. |


--- Page 38 ---
| CABLE SF-RETARIAT DISSEMINATION : CLASSIFIED MESSAGE TOTAL. Copies 3°" ROUTING AND/OR INITIALS SEEN BY. ~)
mene os Co SECRET. comer

_(When Filled In} “K on

ey memes} —-
Ly . —— ~ REPRODUCTION OF THIS COPY PROHIBITED tS - :
ADVANCE COPY. Kl iSSUED_ [[] storren - 7 14 Ax wel Vey :

CLASSIFY TO PILE so a ve ea 4 .
DOREF TO FILE NO. —_ a - (GA DE hea

2 MRILE RID rer To! wae x 7 c tee
INFO!

ACTION pee -E)aw cory a a ae oe
. to a - [FILES VR. ylang “SRP BA
fost ene,

ares ECR ET 2607512 cure usioil
“(0 BB
‘PRIORITY DIRECT Ry Gea eB

INK. MHOR DER | Wat USE ;

KS

rh
Ae |
i:

}

s

S

REF S> Ae: ~ DIRECT ass25. JUNE 1988

“J ROBERT Ce N oLAN N20 1 74 6537.

- can 1ZAT IV.

2o UNLESS: ay ISED Te CONTRARY BASE = WILL AS. IT HAS. aN JHE: PAST y
MS ohe : :

: “LEAVE THIS ‘MATTER STRICTLY. To. co ON

ss “6ST RECENT STATE MESSAGE ‘was us MISSION BERL IN 2567 oF BerY

CT OBER 68. oo
SEC RET .



--- Page 39 ---
13-00000

| NAGELL, RICHARD CASE



--- Page 40 ---
te 5 CoH ;
serine LR: LIZ et aah :
fuwsoeeinmaew,



--- Page 41 ---
13-00000

ee
Att. Ref. ; chow? nse
eal
i

SORT
13 December 1968

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD: -

‘SUBJECT: NAGELL, Richard Case -. #264170

- REF: _ State Dept. Airgram No. A-903 from Berlin - Subject: Psychiatrist's

Report ‘on Richard Case NAGELL, U. S. Citizen Released by GDR

Reference airgram furnishes background information on Subject and
fills in gaps in the chronology of events in Subject's life of interest
to the Agency. .Of particular note is the fact that Subject was acquitted
on 29 April 1968 after his.claim of temporary insanity at the time of
the crime found support in the expert testimony of a noted American
neurologist, Dr.- Edwin WEINSTEIN. An article in the January 1968 issue
of RAMPARTS by William W. TURNER implied that NAGELL had been involved
in-the assassination plot against President KENNEDY and that he had been
"salted away". Subject denied any’ involvement in any conspiracy and denied.
that he had any information of use to GARRISON. Subject alleged that his
fear that the CIA might try to "eliminate" him was planted in his mind by
Mr. GARRISON. (See page 2.of interview report). On page 3 of the interview

_ report Subject states he no longer believes that it is realistic to think that the
CIA was ‘trying t6 kill him.

Berlin who interviewed Sip ece,. was granted a’ continuing Liaison clearance -.~- ~s
on 17 October 1968 at the Fequest of" por//6/78- ae

intervise _ the Washington, . D.C. law firm of NEW, MACKEY and
GEORGE. Newspaper clippings from the WASHINGTON STAR for 17 March 1966

’. and the NEW YORK TIMES for 29 August 1965 reflect that NICEY has been
‘associated with East Berlin attorney, Wolfgang VOGEL and West Berlin

attorney, Juergen STANGE, in a number of cases involving the release
of Americans from East Germany. According to an FBI report dated 3
February 1967 these releases usually involved the payment of specified

_ Sums of money and VOGEL and STANGE were allegedly reaping large monetary

benefits. for their services.

sRs/os

- SECRET "es



--- Page 42 ---
13-00000

ee YE 12 DEC 1869 [on  ¥
Aue iassivien WA [1 CONFIY TIAL RET |

- ROUTING. AND RECORD SHEET —

SUBJECT: (Optionc!)

“Raymond: G. “Rocca . rn ee = To SE
 CICUREA TS ‘| o< 10 December 1968
‘TO:. "ORcer" designation, room “number, and - . _

-_ ‘boilding) Ye 4 “OFFICER'S COMMENTS {Nuniber eoch “comment to show trom whom .
’ ; IE MS INMIALS J whom. _,Dfaw a line across column after each comment.)

Sa’ 610 “etter Gseeret =] CONFIDENTIAL INTERNAL ~—-—)_sUNCLASSIFIED



--- Page 43 ---
13-00000

MEMORANDUM

SUBJEGT: Garrison and the Kennedy Assassination:
Richard Case Nagell (201-746537)

1. Subject was horn 5 Angust 1930 at Greenwich, New York
City, N. ¥. He isa U. 8. citizen with passport J 543069 -

2. Sub Subject is not associated with CIA ond has not been e6
associated. |

3, He entered the U.S. ‘Agmy on 5 Augutt 1948, his eighteenth
birthday. Hia military career wae distinguished, He was awarded
many military decorationa for hin services in Kerea. He was never
AWOL of court-martialled.

4. On 28 November 1954 Subject was ong of six men in a
B-25 which crashed near Friendship Airport. Nagell was the sole oT
survivor. The plane was not found for il L/2 hours. Nagell edo ee fe
severe injury to the head and factal disfigurement. He was honi — es
discharged from the Army on 20 October 1959 with the rank of captain.

_ an Dacember 1959 he was employed as a. special investigator by the .
Dapartment of Alcoholic Control, State of California. He wag digmisacd
from this position in June 1962.. In July 1962 he was shot tn the chest _
but refused te provide the police with further information. In August.
1962 he went to Mextce City. In September and again in October 1962.

‘he appeared at the American Embas#y im Mexica Clty. He asked for
help in collecting mioney from the State of California. He claimed that
he had been approached for espionage recruitment while in Mexico
Gity but refused to provide any particulars. He eaid that he wanted to
retiounce his U.S. citizenship. He left Mexico City an 28 Octaber
1962. On 16 November and 15 December 1962 he was in touch with the
¥BIin New York City and Jacksonville, Florida. During the latter .

‘meeting he said that he had been approached in Washington, D.: G. + by

’ gome@one whorn he considered to be working for the Soviets,



--- Page 44 ---
13-00000

5. In December 1962 and January 1963 Nagell was examined
at the VA hospital at Bay Pines, Florida. The diagnosis was
“‘ghvonic brain syndrome aasocieted with brain trauma with behavioral
reaction characterized by passive agereetive and paranoid featurer. "
{An FBI memorandum of 12 June 1964 noted that Negell was considered

‘mentally disturbed by his. mother, hie brother, an ex-wife, anda

friend. The mother, who said that she bad been under psychiatric care

. for several years, described Subject's brother, Louis, ag an aimost

hopeless alcoholic.)

6. On 20 Septeniber 1963 Subject was arrested in El Pawo,
Texas, onthe chatge of having tried to rob tha State National Bank.
é Sed from Subject's remarka that he had become 8
‘ember after hie discharge from the army, that he
attempted wuicide. three times after bia arrest, and that he had made
arrangements with the GP in Los Angeles to pick up his passport ‘a
El Paso go that he could ge to Cuechoslovakia.

Ne. Ina letter of 6 January 1964 Nagell advised the FBTin
El Paseo that ia September of 1963 he bad baen instracted by an agent

- of @ foreign government to caraply with an agredoent made in May: 1963
* $@ participate in a criminal offense ngainat the U.5
' the PBL. ie Wee this threat, said Nagell, that ed him te try to held up the. ;

}. o2 be exposed to

ination of President

Kennedy: At any rate, somatime after the sasessination Nagel claimed ~~" "~~

that he had known both Oswald and hie wife, Pictures of Nagell were
shown to Marina Oswald on 18 Jawiary 196¢.. Shé said that she id not.

know him,

8. At the Hme of his arrest Subject hud in hia possension a.

‘ notebook which made referance to "Medical Aid to Cuba", the “Fair
_ Play for Cuba. Committee," the names. a: hx persons alloged tobe
GIA agents, and other information. i & the

Security on 12 March 1964 that atthe time arrest Nagell also had a
Het of eix names, marked CIA. The names were ¥. Parker, Mra.
Guthries,.C.. Churchill, 3. Slesa, E. Lethacher, aud J. Davanon, i

“wae later determined that Richard Fecteau alao appeared on this list,

where he was marked as “Lynn, Mass. ", and "DAC (CIA)".



--- Page 45 ---
13-00000

Joseph Frances Davanon, and John Richard Sloss all stated te the best —

- their werk in the Far East. As for Leibacker and Davanon, Nagel:
lived in Los Angeles: in 1962.

‘Ramparts, “The Garrison Commission on the Assageination of .

a. Quvr records show that Richard G. Fecteau was
aboard an American plane shot down over Manchuria in
November 1952 and:-that he ie eerving in Peiping a twenty

" -year sentence on spy charges. Fecteau, an OPC employee,
was quoted in the press a8 saying that he worked for CIA.

o F. Parker wae not identified. He may possibly be
John Floyd Parker, an Agency employee in 1964 who was in
Japan in 1952.

- There ie no pertinent identifiable information about
Mra. ie Guthries; She may be Frances Agnes. Gothris, an
Ageney employee in 1964.

a. CG. Churebill was uct identified. He. may be Greighten
‘Gharchill, whe was in Japan in 1952.

@. J. Sloge may be Joba. Richard Slose, an Agency
employee in 1964.

t. E. Lethacher cindd be Adenticat with Ernst Leibacker
who in. 1964 was in the Los Angeles Meld office of the DCS.

g a, Davanon muy refer to Joseph Frances. Davanon, Joo
also in the Los Angeles, Aielé office at the time. foo Satnies newetiaaet neice

9. John Floyd Parker, Frances Guthrie, Ernst Leibacker,

af their knowledge they had never met Nagell. It is possible, however,
that. Nugell knew or knew of Parker, Gharchill, Bnd Guthrie through —

10. On 16 April 1964 Nagell. pant to the FBEa letter claiming | 7
that in September 1963 he had sent to the Bureau a ‘registered. letter ~
signed "Jack Kramer". The 1964 letter implied that the 1963 letter
had warned the FB! about the impending asaneaination. The FBI. of
course, did not receive auch e letter.

ll. In January 1968 William T. Turner etated in an article das



--- Page 46 ---
13-00000

President Kennedy", p. 56, that Nagell was then still confined

at Leavenworth, that he had been a highly decorated infantry captain
in the Korean War, and that he claimed to have become a CIA agent
thereafter. Ramparta shifted the plane crash in which Nagell was
injured from 1954 and Maryland to 1987 and Cambodia. The article
repeated the allegation that he étaged.a phony holdup in order to be
under arrest when the eteassination occurred.

12. On 6 June 1968 the American Consulate in Zurich cabled
Washington to say that Richard Cane Nagell, pasaport J 543069, had
appeared at the consulate on 4 June and had said that he was working
for a secret U.S. Government agency on a mission to Geneva, where
he was to meet some Japanese. He asked for money. He returned to
the consulate the next day, was incoherent, and seemed psychetic. He
claimed that on 14-16 May 1968 he had been interviewed by District
Attorney Jim Garrison. He said that Garrison had warned him that he
was in danger of being killed and that he wanted to. inform CIA that he
was in Zurich,

13. On 7 September 1968 another William Turner piece was .
printed by Ramparts under the heading " / Assaseinations / Epatein's
Garrison". ft referred to Nagell as a former U.5. intelligence agent
and repeated much the same story that it had told in January, Turner
and | Ramparts may have been unaware that Nagell was out of jail by then.

14. On 25 October 1968 the Washington Post reported that after--
holding Nagell for four months, the East Germane bad released him
on 23 October at an East-West Berlin crossing- point. Negell left-by
plane for the U.S. on 25 Getoher. ‘Informed sources” said that Nagell:
was-taken off a train en route through East Germany to Berlin because —
he made some remarks which the East Germans considered derogatory.

15. On 31 October 1968 State forwarded the téxt of 2 report by a
Uw. &. Army psychiatrist who examined Nagell on 23 October. Nagell
said that he was on active duty with the army from 1948 to 1959 and that
from 1953 to 1959 he was an officer in military intelligence. ‘He also
provided accurate information about the 1954 plane crash and its results ++
among them, in hie own worda,- hie “unstable personality and iramature
or ‘tmpulaive behaviour". He said that he draws 64% disability pay. He
lost bie job in California because one night in 1962, while drunk, he tried
to break down the door of the apartment of his estranged wife.

After his confused attempt in 1963 to rob the E)] Paso bank, he
spent 41/2 yeare in prison. He wae examined by Dr. Edwin Weinstein,



--- Page 47 ---
13-00000

anoted Aracrican nourologist, who found his electroentephalograma

abnormal, and af a regult he was released f{eom prison on 29 April 1968.

. Nagelt ‘paid that because of the Ramparts article af Jéscuary. 1968 he
was-paid a visit by Jim Garrison. He told Garrison that he had no.
infornistion.of any wee to him. The interview left him, however, with

‘two-fears: that Garrison might try to subpoena him and that CIA might

try to “eliminate him, (By the time he was providing this information

|. $a Berlin Nageil was well aware that he was not involved in any conspiracy

to apsagsinate Président Kennedy.) He said that his fear of CIA was
planted in'ble mind by Mr. Garrison.

Alter his releane he went-to New York, where.a sieter Hvea. He
almost hit bya car driven without lights and decided to go to Europe

| $6 eteaps being killed by CIA. dn June he appeared in Zurich. He next

#et-out for West Berlin but was teken off the train on 11 June 1968.

_ For several months he was repeatedly asked to admit that he was a apy.

Eventiaily he concluded that the ouly way to obtain his release was to
pretend that he was mestally ill. He did so, ‘won examined by &
peychiatrint, and was released.

"ie no longer believe that it a reallatic to think that the GIA whan
trying to Hill him." He termed himeelf “chronically paranoid".
Army prychlatsist seactuded “Currently he ta not perce sed poem
Sompetent tn a legal sad paychtatele sents a ee ee ee

: Nagelite final. Femark was, “Well, Pn tet ‘you-one thing, that's .
the Just tine: Lever tater «train Ssieagh East Germany. "



--- Page 48 ---
13-00000

| Originated by: BC/ GI/REA:DEPrattidim 10 December 1968

‘Distribution:
a 2 « Office of General Counsel

_ ba AMDCE
be “Olfice- of Security :
1 = DES (Atta: George Musulin)

1 + PRivia C/CtU/REA :
1 - CI/R&A chrone
1 ~ DP chrono:



--- Page 49 ---
13-00000

20 November 1968

MEMORANDUM FOR: DC/RGA
(of State

‘SUBIECE st “Richard Case KAGE:

>: Aebachea for. for your inforustion is tae menoraniun dated 26 Narch 196
from Nr. Solia of this staff. listing the names of seven: persons found in en
address book by FRE on the: occasion of their arrest of Richard Case

:  Yave noted in lenghand on the attachment the names’ of those
individuals on whom w have a record. ‘The others are. designated either
unidentifiable or no record. :

Conti C. Tighe



--- Page 50 ---
13-00000

Mr. R. J. Leonard _ _. 26 March 1964
Chief, Research Branch/SRS

NAGELL, Richard Case

1, Attached is a copy ofaz2 October 1962 memorandum from
the FBI in regard to Riehard Case NAGELL.

2. SA Alexander W. NEALE, Jr. of the Washington Field

‘Office, FSI, has informally advised the undersigned that NAGELL has.
- been arrested on the West Coast for bank robbery, is going to be:

tried in the near future for the alleged crime, and that NAGELL had in.

his Possession the following information:

Richard FECTEAU. = OF meee

(Lynn, Mass}
DAG {CIA} .

CIA | ;
Mr. &. PARKER - WS- :
- Mre, GUTHRIES - NR.
_Mr. C, CHURCHILL - \“.
Mr. J. DAVANON~- os ecm
Mr. J, SLOSS — os Neem
Mr. -E. LEIBACHER ~ o% neeo2

nad
i
acs cin nee

. 3. A check of SQ Indices has revealed no record of NAGELL, and
an RI check only disclosed the attached FBI report. Please recheck SO
Indices on. the subject, have a file set up on an. expedite basis, and on an-

_ | expedite basis identify the above individuals as to whether any have any
' gonnection with this Agency. The above Richard FECTEAU may be
' identical to the individual whd was captured by the Chinese Cammeniste :

and is now in prison.

4. Also check with Mrs. THORN of OG/C to determine whether
©0/C has any record of NAGELL.. It is believed that very possibly some



--- Page 51 ---
13-00000

of. the: above: individuals may be connected with the Los Angeles or San :
'.. Franeiedo. Field Office of 00/C, but atthe present moment limit the aoe

- theck with Mra, THORN to determi if they have oy record of in
; ~Riehard Cane NAGELL, a -

‘Bruce L. Solie’

 BLSijrg



--- Page 52 ---
- SRT

£Q November 1968

_MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD:
acs Nao, Richard Case - #264170

REF: _ State Telegrams No. 258355 to U..S. Mission Berlin dtd 19 Oct
1968 and No.. 2538 from Berlin ata 22 Oct 1968

2. Clipping from WASHINGTON POST ata 25 Oct 1968

Subject is one of the characters in the GARRISON case. See summary
‘dtd 18 January 1968 in his file. He was arrested for bank robbery at EL
"Paso, .Texas on.-20 September ‘1963 and. sen ed to Leavenworth penitentiary. -
"Tn dume 1968 CIA received a cable fromfPern jin which NAGELL was quoted as
telling the. CONGEN he wanted them to "inform CIA he. dn:Zurich".

‘The details of how and why . NAGELL is in Europe, in particular. East
Berlin, are missing. State Telegram No. 2538 from Berlin states that
the charges. are ‘still unknown. “Basic ‘documents -~ are still in hand of State
Security auta orities. ".

+ was Has _zeieased by. East German authppities together with one
Cleon Bits JAMES.) An intensive review of JAMES' file (#266602) failed
al & = y comection between JAMES and Subject. “State Department

‘in the same situation in’ East Berlin. _ JAMES is also mentally unstable and
‘has. cause enbarrassment: ‘abroad for the. State Department he

_ the names of two Agency. employees who were in a covert status. It was never

determined how. JAMES obtained these names.

. Sarah a XS
‘SRS/0S



--- Page 53 ---
13-00000 |

Boca by alee

i
t



--- Page 54 ---
13-00000

JAMES, LEON BURRIS
JA JANES) LEG PAUL

-

Se NT--TND--U/ND— SACO
JAMES;LEON BURRIS GS 64 M266602
7A NELSON, THOMAS GEORGE /8 23NOV44 CAL O/T SR

soruemaatiat



--- Page 55 ---
13-00000

SIRHAN’S MOTIVES”

_ Unlike Lee. Harvey Oswald, Sirhan Sirhan
has lived ta tell of his motivations— but he
has chosen to remain silent, The only other
potential. source ef infi¥mation is his

* family, which had not, spoken to the press.
Mahmoud’ Abdel-Hadl, an Egyptian
correspondent jor’ Akhbar Elyoum in

* Cairo, recently gained access to Sirhan’s
family. Based upon information supplied
him by the family, he has written exclusiv-

.ely for Ramparts the following account:
of Sirhan’s motivations and the strategy
he plans for his trial. -

Because of the fortheoming trial and

the difficulty of dealing with this subject
without emotional involvement, the editors

of Ramparts have elected to present this |

‘information of historic interest to our
readers without display, and in as ob-
jective a form as possible.

ECAUSE TAM AN ARAB T was able to
breuk through the barrier of sus-

picion that had ‘stopped other
journalists cold and obtain the first in-
depth interviews the Sirhan family has
given since the assassination. From their
comments and from what Sirhan has said
to them, a picture of the man and his
motives begins to emerge, replacing the

misleading portra its which haveswamped

the U.S. press.
The fact that Sirhan has not publicly

discussed his trial ts no accident. It is his |

own strategy.- something he developed
_ after thinking about it for Jong ‘hours in
"his ‘specially made jail cell, In fact, he
has confided to his family that he will
~ Hever make aay statement unless special
Provisions are made for the courtroom
proceedings. What Sirhan wants is,
quite.simply; publicity. He wants the
major television networks to.be allowed
to’ broadcast the entire trial. If they do
this, he says, he will tell all. ““And if they
refuse?” his brother Adel recently asked
him. “Then I shall go to the gas chamber:
silent,” “Sirhan reptied.
“2 To understand why Sirhan-is indeed

extpable of such aaagt, one mast under -

stioad that be ory tiest and: foremeast an
Atab, bor at Pafesdine and consumed
with iaterest inthe Middle astern con-
thet. He is deeply committed to making
his trial a public-and political forum for
the Arab position.

College educated, articulate and a

{"=={Assassinations}-——C 3

about his own ability to cope with his
predicament. His eldest brother, Shereif,

told me that Sirhan studies the intrica--

cies of his case as many as ten hours «

day in his cell.-Shercif recalls that Sirhan -

recently said to him, “I do not need a
lawyer. 1 understand my case und know
how to defend myself.” But even so,
Attorney Russell Parsons is defending
his client, and doing it on Sirhan's own
grounds, “The main issue,” Parsons told
me, “‘is to answer this question: why, for

{what reason, did Sirhan kill Robert
“Kennedy? There are 100 witnesses who

saw Sirhan shooting Mr. Kennedy, but
no one seems to know why he did it.”

. + Sirhan and his attorney hope that the

defense—presuming that the television

‘networks are. allowed into. the court-

room—will show that Sirhan did not
have “malice aforethought” in shoot-

ing Kennedy because the act was a polit-:

ical gesture, and that Kennedy, to Sirhan
at least, was merely a ‘symbol. His
brother Adel notes that “if Sirhan was
just an assassin, he could have done it in
another way, just by having a gun with a
telescope. He went to the Ambassador
Hotel expecting to get caught; that is

| why he left his notes at home. I believe

that Sirhan wanted to get caught so that
he could say what he believes.”

HEN I FIRST TRIED to meet with ©
We Sirhan family, 1 was re-"
-fused. Security is extremely

heavy around them, and they are under-
standably wary of new faces. Later, when
I finally obtained an invitation to meet
with them, Mrs, Sirhan apologized, I
believe for -having been inhospitable to
a fellow Arab. :

This family, which fled Jordan to seek
greater safety and security than it had
known, is now living in terror. They are
somewhat at a loss to understand the
events which have suddenly catapulted
them into history. None of the four
brothers goes to hisjob; they all feel that.

death follows them everywhere, and they
move carefully, with a heavy guard,”

“Why don’t you just leave this country 2"
asked Shereif, “Where shall we go?”
he answered. “To. whom shall we leave
our brother? Our land is under Israel's
occupation.” Shereif clarified his state-
ment: ‘Our brother is in jail; we have to
stay.”

6 R AMP ART S

voracious reader, Sirhan is confident

I sensed not only the Sirhans’ con-
fusion, but also some bitterness. They

. have not-received any aid from the Arab -

countries, as they originally thought they
might. Parsons is also somewhat ‘sur-
prised; he had hoped that the various
focal Arab cqnsulates would help defray -
court costs, ;-

Indeed, Las Angeles’ Jordania con-
sul, who visited Sirhan in jail at Sichan's
request, indidated to me that the accused
assassin hadjexpected the Arab people ©
to treat him as a hero. However, except .
for some Palestinian extremists, his act

_-has been universally’ ‘repudiated by the
- Arab world. One Arab newspaper has -

said editorially, “‘We don’t feel any

_-responsibility for this. It is the society -

that fed him with hostility, the society
that’ gave him the gun, that is responsi-
ble.” Members of the Arab Students*
Association, of which ‘Sirhan was once

 anofficer, feel that the killing of Kennedy ~

was a terrible mistake. One of them suid
to me, “What are we going to do. with

“the rest of the American candidates? Kill

them all. because” they want to help
Isracl?”

Still, the Sirhans’ fri iends a are primarily .
Arab, and they live in an atmosphere
that is more: Arab than American. The

‘entire family spent a good deal of time :

discussing the Arab-Isracli conflict. The
mother says that Sirhan was the most
sensitive and the mi

once saw a television report of Robert.
Kennedy addressing the members of the
Neveh Shalom Temple in Portland, ©
Oregon. While in the synagogue, Ken-
nedy, wearing u-yarmulke, declared that
the United- States must help Israel
against aggression from whatever source.
“Unlike the South Vietnamese,” Ken-
nedy said, “‘the Israelis have shown they
are willing to fight for their own survival.

‘Indeed, Israel is the very opposite of
_Vietnam: the Israeli government is very

democratic, effective and free of corrup-
tion. Its people are united in its support.”
The senator then urged the Johnson Ad-
ministration to proceed at once with the
sate of 50° Phantom jet lighters tothe
feraell Au Force and to cut off economic
wid to the Arab countries. this whole
episode made Sirhan very angry, Shereif
recalls. “He left the room putting his
hands on his ears and almost weeping.”

Continued on page 8



--- Page 56 ---
13-00000

Continued from page 6

“""L asked Sirhan’s mother why she
thought her son had shot Kennedy.
“Everything in this country was helping
Sirhan,” she maintained. “It was push-
ing him to the danger point. Everything,
the propaganda of the Zionists, every-
thing, was against his country, against
his people.”

Adel described Sirhan’s current state
of mind: ‘*He feels he has done a terrible
thing, but he feels now it is too late to be
sorry. Now he wants Americans to listen
to something they have never listened

: to.”

And at their first meeting in the jail,
Sirhan's mother said to him, “Shame on
you. Why have you done such a thing?”
He replied, “H's (oo late to speak of itt.
But all the Americans will know why.”

: —MAHMOUD ABDEL-HADI

[Assassinations] —

EPSTEIN'S GARRISON

- Woe SUMMERS AGO a tiindem attack
T= the Warren Report all but rele-
guted that work to the fiction

section of your local library. The first
was Mark Lane's Rush to Judgment,
which convincingly demonstrated—us-
ing the’ Warren Commission's own evi-
dence—that Oswald: could not have done

’ it alone, and drew the first dim outlines
of the conspiracy theory. The second
was.Edward Jay Epstein’s Jnquest, which
exposed the rather shoddy inner work-
ings of the Commission and laid bare the
tortured logic it finally employed to dis-
pel notions of a conspiracy. ,

. Both books became best sellers, but
~ their authors have since gone different
ways, Lane, who shuttered his law prac-
ice and struggled for years ta get his
Manuscript published in the United
States (it was first published in Britain),
has stumped the country in support of
District Attorney Jim Garrison's theory
that the assassinution was curcied out by
an anti-Castro paramilitary team super-

at

. vised by® persons with cia affiliations,

Epstein, whose book was a converted
Cornell University master’s thesis—the
subject was urged upon him by his men-
tor, Andrew Hacker—has emerged as
one of Garrison's most fervid accusers.
His vehicle is The New Yorker: in the
issue of July 13, he delivered a 25,000-.

word blast at Garrison, calling the DA's’

investigation a fraud.

The New Yorker article had its genesis

over a year ago, when the author showed

up at Garrison's office in New Orleans..

According’ to Chief Investigator Louis

Ivon, Epstein spent about 48 hours in-

town, some three hours at the office, and

.hasn’t been seen since. Much of what.he

writes about has occurred since this
touch-and-go visit and is obviously hear-

‘say on his part, yet he writes with the

authoritative tone of a participant: Un-

doubtedly this technique is convincing:

to his audience, which assumedly is un-
familiar with the intricacies of Garrison's

| investigation. But to those familiar with

the facts, the article is badly slanted.

For example, Philosophy Professor
Richard. Popkin of the University. of.
California at San Diego, author of the

‘book The Second Oswald (propounding -

the theory of an Oswald double) and
“Garrison’s Case’ in The New York
Review of Books (September 14, 1967),

“recently commented on the article:

“I found it a queer mix of facts, half-
facts, rumors and very dubious informa-
tion from people hostile to Garrison.
Epstein has compressed all this to make
it loak like everything's on the same
level. 1 think it would take an awful lot
of work to disentangle what he’s saying
on almost any page as to how much of
it has a factual basé, how much of it is

‘rumor that he has heard from people,

how much of it are charges that have
been made by people like [William] Gur-

-vich [who volunteered to work on the

’ investigation without pay, passed him-

self off as. the Chief Investigator, then’

«turned on Garrison] against. Garrison,

which haven't been substantiated any-

where except by Gurvich's statement of .

them. And also that he tends to take
facts and information and rumors and so
on, that occurred over a year and a half’s
period, and ‘compress them all into
simultaneous events, so that a statement
made by Garrison at one’ time is
pounced upon on the basis of informa-
tion or statements he mude a year and a

half later in a totally different context,

existed.”

‘So Lb think it'y a quite unfair presentae

tion, which has some factual base, but

which also has a lot of very dubious

elements in it.”?” ;
One of the: dubious elements is Ep-

stein’s version, of the testimony of Dean -~-

Andrews Jr., ‘8 colorful attorney who-
numbers among his former clients Os-

““wald (who wanted his undesirable dis-

charge from the Marine Corps rectified) .
and the late David William Ferrie, a°
central figure in the Garrison investiga-
tion. The day. after the assassination,
Andrews told the Commission he_re---.
ceived a phone call from a man he knew . :
as Clay Bertrand, whom he described as .
a “lawyer without a briefcase” for local
homosexuals. Bertrand asked him to go
to Dallas and defend: Oswald. Garrison’.
contends Bertrand is Clay Shaw, whom .
he has charged with conspiracy.
According .to Epstein, Andrews ini-
tially gave'the Fat “several different de-
scriptions” of Bertrand, and finally ad-
mitted that -Bertrand ‘‘was merely a
figment of his imagination.” Later, be-
fore the Commission, Andrews stated
that he had fecently seen Bertrand in a
bar and, Epstein says, described him as
“a boy” who.was-“five feet eight inches”

and had “sandy hair.” “No other.clues =>

to Bertrand's identity turned up, how-. -

ever,” writes: Epstein, ‘‘and Wesley J.

Liebeler, a Commission lawyer who con-
ducted the investigation in this arca, said
he was convinced that no such person

An objective reading” of “Andrews

__testimony, jowever, reveals that he
‘told the Far-that Bertrand was“‘approxi-
: mately six feet one inch to six feet two

inches in height, brown hair, and well \”

dressed" —a' description that closely .-

matches thg tall, aristocratic Shaw. As
for Bertrand being a figment of his-
imagination, Andrews declared, “That's _
what the Feebees [FBr] put on.” He re~
counted that G-men had pestered him ~ .
to the point. where he told them, “Write

‘what you want, that I am nuts. I'don't -
care.” As for his later remark: to the. ~

Commission's Mr. Liebeler that Ber-

trand was only five feet, eight inches, -.

Andrews explained that “this time I was
looking for the fellow, he was sitting”
down.” Néwhere does he refer to Ber-
trand as a “boy.” Epstein was perhaps
confused by his exclamation: ‘I don’t
play Boy Scout and measure them.”

In his superficial examination of Gur- -

he Continued on page 12-

Shatch hy Mary Morhoff



--- Page 57 ---
13-00000

Ce —_

Continued from page &
rison’s case, Epstein evidently failed to
check the police records prepared upon

Shaw’s arrest. Thoroughly shaken.by the |

arrest. Shaw blurted out, according to
Patrolman Aloysius Habighorst, that he
had used the its “Clay Bertrand.” The
alias was duly entered on the fingerprint
card and booking sheet, .
~ One of the most fascinating charac-
fers in the conspiracy drama is Richard

se -Nagell, a former U.S,
agent who claims he encountered Oswald
in Mexico City in 1963, and had been
-instructed by his spy superiors to deter-
mine if the rumors of an assassination
attempt had any foundation. Nagell says
he learned that the first attempt against
Kennedy was scheduled for September
26 in Washington, D.C., and that Oswald
(who crossed the border into Mexico the

“HERE COME DE JUDGE”

ONSIDER THE REVOLT ON THE LEFT
( if the following occured:
. The President, on the eve of
his abdication, arranged to accept the
resignation of the chief justice of the
United States Supreme Court in order
to replace him with the President's
former lawyer, then an ass Hy
As a parlay, the Pres
lo the Senate the name of his oldest hand,
holding crouy to dill (he vacaney erented
by the promotion of bis former kiwyers
The chief justice, who had weitten a

famous report designed to satisfy the

~ people that the assassination of the
President's predecessor was sans con-
spiracy and the sole act of a demented
mind, conditioned his resignation on the
Senate’s approval of the appointments;

The President's ex-lawyer, when called
to testify before a Senate committee,
conceded that during his three years on
the high court he hid continued Co aet
as the President's advisor:

That pursuant to this cole, be tue sat
in on numerous cabinet-level mechs,
but that he had merely “summarized”
the views of others for the benefit of the
President ;

That as a justice he had dressed down
& prominent businessman who had criti-

17 RANI ENT

ee
Intelligence

Embassy in Mexico City. When the anti-
Castro paramilitary team could not
penetrate the Presidential security in
Washington, Oswald got a reprieve. But
Nagell, who says he was sure the attempt

would come off but failed to get the FBI-

to listen, faked a bank robbery in El
Paso on September 20 so that he would

be arrested and in federal custody when _
‘the assassination occurred. . »
Epstein . dismisses. Nagell ‘as being

mentally unbalanced, noting that “court
records indicated that,Nugell had suf-
fered brain damage in an airplane crash

in 1957” and that, following the bank °
episode, he was.‘‘an inmate of a federal.

institution for the criminally insane in
Springfield, Missouri.” As he does so
frequently throughout the article, Ep-

stein delivers’a version which if devel- .

cized war spending, ‘though whether his
call was made at the:President's request
he could not say and remain faithful to
the Separation of Powers; _

That the businessman had retracted

“his statement, though in the end it

proved to be accurate;

That the justice could not answer
questions concerning his judicial opin-
ions since the Constitution specifies that

members of Congress may not be ques- —

tioned about their acts in any pluce other
than in Congress;

‘That despite this asserted Constitu-
tional bar, the justice pointed to his dis-

' senting vote against extending the ‘one-

man-one-vote principle to local govern-
ment as proof of his devotion to State’s
rights;

That although he had been at the
President’s disposal as advisor-summar-
izer, he had never been involved in dis-
cussions that could conceivably reach
the Court; .

That the issues under discussion at the
iopevel meetings had canged from the
Vietnam War (o riots in the cities;

“That the justice had voted to jail druft
card burners und had voted against
taking up for consideration the legality
of the war;

That he voted to give the police sweep-
ing rights to stop-and-frisk suspects on

; training afer his recovery, indicating _

that he had. no permanent brain injury.
Moreover, the fact that he stood trial |
implies that he was legally sane. Re- ©
cently, he was released from Leaven- .
worth Penitentiary—he had. been at

Springfield only temporarily.

The publication of the Epstein article
came at an opportune time for Clay
Shaw. Obtaining advance copies, his at-
torneys entered it as evidence before a
three-judge federal panc! which was hear-
ing arguments that the DA was “con-
ducting a‘rein of terror” and “perse-
cuting” the defendant. Apparently the
panel was unimpressed, for it unani-
mously rejected the defense’s argument
and ordered the case to trial. .

If Garrison does get his day in court—
a day Epstein has struggled to deny him

chances are his case will hold up better
thari ‘The New: Yorker's” brief for’ the *

defense. i — WILLIAM TURNER
i a

' suspicion alone;

“That within two months of his pro-
posed elevation he had authored a book-
let, “Concerning Dissent and Disobedi-
ence,” which limited the moral right to
disobey laws‘to those “basically offensive
to fundamental values of life or the Con-
stitution” and held that even in such
cases no legal defense could be urged...
‘but jailing must be willingly accepted;

That shortly r that book was pub-
lished, the justice denounsed, in as rire
interview from Washiyton, fhe activities
of some of the Columbia University
protestors as “toltlly inexcusable. from
the point of even primitive morality’ s

That: during his first term on the
Court, he cast the deciding vote uphold-
ing the conviction and five-year sentence
of Ralph Ginzburg for “pandering” a
non-obscene magazine; :

That during each of his three terms he
nearly always voted for business interests
and against efforts to cut down the
(rusts;

‘That
Court he wis
been one of the
advisors on the Vietnam War.

Consider the revolt on the left ifany-
thing like this happened in 1968.

throughout hus years an the
y nitnored to have
sehen’ antast hawk ish

—SIDNEY E. ZION



--- Page 58 ---
13-00000

a Sete ee Bees

f° |”) OFFICIAL ROUTING Suir

one —

| [action | _[oirect repLy | | PREPARE REPLY
|__| APPROVAL [|_| DispatcH _—s| _| RECOMMENDATION '

| [comment | re
;  [__ [concurrence  [[inrormation | [signature
(aR Rn

The attached report by Mrs. Hall
-based -on cable traffic re appearance of__ nn on
a Richard NAGELL in Zurich raises question fo: 7
FBI. Is NAGELL in GARRISON investigation
still in prison, or is he one and the same

|
person in Switzerland? .
i
!

{
F
}



--- Page 59 ---
wee ee ce “ae dune 1968
ee ee ok it
MEMORANDUM FOR: ater, tios/ens df io af

| SuBOBCE: HAGEL; Richard Coes ~ feSIn7O en

REF: _ IN Cable 25955 ata 6 June 1968 from(Zurich J

OUT Cable 06625 ata 7 dune 1968 tofZurich ]

15 18

. Reference cables concern the claim of an individual appearing at
_ the Consul General's office in Zurich, Sq@itzerlend on 4 June 1968 that
. he is one Richard Case NAGELL. NAGELL was sentenced to.a 10 year. term for

“bank robbery “On. a June 196% and. is supposedly in a federal prison in Missouri.

GARRISON interviewed Subject. as.a witness in his investigation
according to a news: clipping from. the CHICAGO AMERICAN: dated 2 January
1968. The clipping “is marked in ‘Subject's file which is attached. ‘This —
“file also contains’a copy of the summary dated 18 January 1968 pregpared
in research on the GARRISON’ ‘CASE.

-. It would be of interest for documentation of Subject 's Pile to
. ascertain from the FBI if Subject.is still in préson.

_I did not receive reference IN.Cable 25955 initially. Attached is
a copy I obtained from-O0S Cable Desk. However, the original copy was
routed to SRS and it is possible some one.else on the Staff is already
handling the matter. —

| Abt. as Stated

a

TTF sant

scat ners at ae
overt cat

fo



--- Page 60 ---
13-0000

ABLE SECRETARIAZ-DISSEMINATION
ERSQN/UNIT: NOTIFIED "e

“NEVA WHERE T 0 MEET “JAPANESE”. WANTED conse

“ COULD: NOT ASSIST. “a
, 2. SUBJ RETURNED T

a GFICER,. ‘THUS was

on SUBJ MADE ‘ASSUMPT 10N TEGE

"THEREFORE WANTS. "IN
[S-/8
“PAGE (ZuR 1¢ Ji

a ABOVE, FYI. CONGEN



--- Page 61 ---
13-00000

MESSAGE FORM:
“JOTAL. COPIES:



--- Page 62 ---
13-00000

SUBJECT: BAGELL, Richard Case
Ve :
I ALLEQNE LOR SEA COMMECTTOH:
RAGELL, “a - Monet. aithongh, oyb, was of
decorated ; | Seterest to 05 tn 1960 and early
Captain in the Koresn War", 1965 because of infomation
elieges thet he becmme a furnished to the Agency by the
CIA agent. He said he PRT that he hed in dis. posession
fired the gun in tha bank at the names of nix CTA employees
BL Pano, Texas. because he et tue time of his avcest for bank
wented to be in custody when sobbery et El Paco, Texas on 20
the asuessination of September 1963.
that “the FEE iljegailly
crucial to his defense,
euch as notehocks
the names of cértaia CIA

' Aleo, RAGELL compleine he has:
deen eslted avay beesuse of
vhat he knows. .



--- Page 63 ---
13-00000

-chronolegy)

be pousensi ee ae m tut no further enticn So indicates

,

Suajeet*s file reflects no Agieey taterest in hin prior ta March 196k

"Pan the amee CHA CTA enplopees were Found an hts poastasion when arcested

Tie RIPARS chain that he seostned tutsliigence training after the plane
crash {5 true. The crash oceunted 22 Hovenbar 1974 én ona he gratusted fron

g iaatebiiity wan probably due to brain damage ouffered An the airplane

The BAMPAGTS article's ciate that HAGEL eel4 he fired the gua tn the

"took place ts net completely in cosfltct with ea statemen$ RAGELL mede on

1 dantary 1964 widen ws, however, after the acvessination, (eee page & of

The RAMPARTS article's altegetion that the FRI took from HAGEL & acte-
book sconteining the memes of CIA emplopses is true.

; EMESLite campleint that be vas “salted away” ie open to specuttion A
ten year prison sentence dees sppear harvh, considering the dacumnted brain

Ss et



--- Page 64 ---
13-00000 ; .
: , 7 C . oh.

Gaauge be suffered tn the B25 plane crash while he vas tn the U. 8.



--- Page 65 ---
¥3-00000., rege Fes YP . (
; “CHICAGO, ILLINOIS. |. .-% : ~
AMERICAN :

- $-439,360
$-494,505

i a _— we bee SER OMER e , GARRISON BELIEVES THAT Oswald. was schooled in!
: OS CNP Oo ” ; . Covert operations by the CIA. while ia the marine corps

7 Ne yit tO. H. EScen | at Atsugi naval.siation in Japan. Supporting -evidence is
we eI Se ee 8 ’ Oswald's proficiency in ‘the Russian. language, the source of

7 es = | Which was never explained, the ease with which he entered
Looe : BY JACK MABLEY ape, "| - Russia, and: the ‘lack. of ‘censure’ by thé government-on his’
THE INVESTIGATION INTO the. assassination of Presi-’ | _ return, or :by ‘the Jnarine'corps in hig-discharge. ; | *
Gent Eennedy is being reopened. It i$ being conducted by a} - In effect; Garrison icels Oswald was ither a CIA’ agen
prosecutor. with the ‘power of subpena and a grand jury ~| “or was involved with CIA ‘activities. - - -- ae

re

power to .indict.- ve wee
Been It would be. better.for-the. country
if-the fodoral government were mak-
““ihg thé investigation rather than a
“New Orleans. official who -has -been
: accused of beitigsunstable.and of

Seeking héddlines...°° ".t a

because. thoy ‘thought Ken:
communist... .

“to be
“on' Carrying ff thru, © Stier: 2

-““A-humber. of: writerg and: sélf-
appointed invéstigators also are dis- .
satisfied. with conflicting facts and
-unanswered questions, and they con-.
tinue.to publish evidence.to rebut the
i .Warrén ‘commission. conclusion. that
: Lee Earyey Oswald. alone was involved in the assassination

ment :
nal

Jl, SARRISON

gent, who says he. sent.\a-:
Edgar Hoover warning him: of :the ©,
ot: If this is true,-Hoover and the FBI would |;
Greadful dereliction of duty. °-. .
‘The CIA’ and CIA ‘fronts are deeply’ involved in’’the i
activities of ‘the .men’ ‘Garrison believes ‘Plotted. the "Presi- ‘4
dent's murder. ee Dope SEDO
-‘Turner, the Ramparts investigator, believes powerful ‘:
1° Government agencies -are doing everything in their power i
i.. to discredit: Garrison, .. wh ae : cack
yc Ten” persons’ involved in“the. case have
‘them, violently, since: the agsassination, All
Staves ‘with inform: Gartison: considers
‘investigation. : OES -
- Unless..Garrisén’ is Killed or removed from office in |
Some way, itis. difficult: to. see what can: ste aim from:
of the Minutemen and American Nazis. i ing these storiés, probably in a’ court’ of lav, ..u that the’
a Their common cause was to encourage or mount a revolt |’ Public may jud ir validi .
in Cuba -against Castro. They also were ‘strongly anti. ~ °°" ———
“communist. . ; :

7

“+ reporting, particularly. in exposing the CIA ‘infiltration into 1

* college’ activities...’ / OF de Bona
Ramfarts assigned aif investigator, William W. Turtier,

“who they say is a’ former FBI agent, to’ spend ‘9. months

a

looking into the New Orleans evidence. | tooo,
“I have. worked closely with thé D, A, [Garrison] and his
staff,” Turner reports.: “In-iny opinion, there: is no question
. that they have uncovered a. conspiracy.” : a
' The gist of the New.Orleans. case is: that,Oswald was”
Anvolved’ with” a~heterogeneous. group~of adventurers, -anti-
Castro Cubans, and radical righters who included members

pos

ve is no question this group existed. Garrison has *

2 that Oswald was part of it. Garrison’s investigators i 2. .
evidence that :Ogwald’s '‘pré-Russian Jeanings actually ¢ .

a front, or a disguise to conceal his real role as an :

: -ommunist. ye, we a



--- Page 66 ---
SI nite: Ose Yate jams Re K rehead Naaeee

Sy as fine 969.
Die App.1969

. 7 yadanre

me DR PReyehisTeET Te Re SIL Rison From vs Beau

‘Dated aq? Oc7- Hed

| > Siae Dew Tesi ams Den 19 Of, 196 F

RADE 3a Oer- f CP


--- Page 67 ---
13-00000 .

, a %S PAI WHICH Mi MAY "BE San a8.

BUILDING

A o 2 41 REPLACES FORM 36-8

WHICH MAY BE USED. -

EXTENSION



--- Page 68 ---
— HCG639

. CONFIDENTIAL
PAGE 01 STATE 969053
17 —
ORIGIN. SCS 84

INFO OCT O1,EUR @8,SCA al, PPT @2,CIAE 00, 1NR 07, NSAE @0,RSC Bl,
DODE : 00, TRSY it, 1035 R Be  , .

*..66665
DRAFTED BY:SCA:SCS:HLUPPI/WRJOCHIMSEN
APPROVED BY:SCS:HOBART LUPPI
-PPT:MR. RITCHIE (PHONE) ©
. CU maeennneenseesnceeees | BTSIIB

R @22142Z MAY 697°."

FM SECSTATE WASHDG ~

.TO AMCONSUL FRANKFURT . ©
INFO AMEMBASSY PARIS

/AMEMBASSY ROME

~ AMEMBASSY MADRID

AMCONSUL ZURICH

USMISSION: BERLIN’
CONFIDENTIAL STATE 069953.

PARIS PASS USSS

REF: BERLIN. 7543 STATE 62744 - RICHARD NAGELL

134s 274A ~ RICHARD NAGELL

1. “IF NAGELL STILL FRANKFURT OR INQUIRES AT ADDRESSEE: POSTS

HE MAY BE INFORMED DEPARTMENT ATTEMPTED TO TRACE WIFE BUT
WAS UNABLE TO DO SO.

“2. A SEARCH OF THE’ AVAILABLE PASSPORT FILES DISCLOSED NO
RECORD ON MITSUKO. TAKAHASHI NAGELL« ae

-@P- Ae _ROGERS

; - ~ a wT ere wee — _ CONFI DENT TAL noe re es

ett

AS


--- Page 69 ---
ames SecRETARIAT DISsEM By 4 PERS: TOTAL COPIES: ‘ T E L E G RAM_

AL :
“ACTION. SCS oA

OER 1717@4Z APR 69 ZFF. BERLIN ZURICH
~ FM AMEMBASSY MADRID
‘TO .USMISSION BERLIN.

, . AMGONSUL. ‘UR ICH

 FBILAND CIA, AND. PUBLICITY. THREATS.
2s (NAGELL" SUBSEQUENTLY. ‘VISITED CONSULATE. BARCELONA. MARCH 7 |

“ DEFENSE ATTACHE, CHIEF CONSEC, -AND. MADE BUT DID NOT KEEP .
- APPOINTMENT. WITH CULTURAL ATTACHE. .

' NOVEMBER 1954. DIAGNOSIS DATED "4 FEB “1955: “PARANOID pensOH

rae or mae aie

-SECR E T MADRID 1429,
“ROME FOR VA “OFFICE EUROPE .
“SUBJECT: WELFARE RICHARD c CASE NAGEL

1. IN INTERVIEWS WITH CONSULAR OFFICER ZURICH FEBRUARY 27 ,

Deprtment of State “.

“SECRET. «Hea? /V

INFO EUR 17,SCA°61,VA @lsL. 635 CIAE QB, DODE: 00, INR 875 NSAE 00, P oa,
RSC Ol, USIA. 12, PPT. 62, SY 03, FBI Bly 7056 Wo ‘
ea nne tebe s ee in wenn: L4al7

INFO SECSTATE WASHDC 5522
AMEMBASSY PARIS”
AMEMBASSY ROME .

REF + BERLIN 668

AND 28 NAGELL MADE. USUAL COMPLAINTS AGAINST USG PARTICULARLY

19, AND MADE FIRST. OF SEVERAL. VISITS. EMBASSY MADRID. MARCH .. . ; :
20 WHERE HE TALKED AT GREAT LENGTH WITH. P&W OFFICERS, - Foe . “

3. ACCORDING CAS, NAGELL’ “ES NOT AND HAS ‘NEVER BEEN” 7 oo |

ASSOCIATED WITH CASs..INFO FROM-DEPT: NAGELL*S ‘MENTAL AFFLICH. eo

TION ORIGINATED -IN BRAIN. DAMAGE, SUFFERED AIR CRASH": *) - Pon (
ALITY, PASSIVE AGRESSIVE. PERSONALITY REACTION.

4. ACTIVITIES IN MADRID: IN: INTERVIEW: WITH. THREE “CONSULAR
OFFICERS NAGELL: ACCUSED. USG AGENCIES OF “LEANING ON HIM”
AND DEMAND OFFICERS PaSS THE WORD AROUND TO "LAY OFF" OR, HE

SECRET |



--- Page 70 ---
13-

00000

FILE, RF,

Department of State

+ CABLE SECRETARIAT Dissem BY . PERG... : “TOTAL COPIES: 2 TELEGRAM

ae)

SECRET.
PAGE G2 MADRID.91429°-181241Z

’ WOULD BLOW UP. ALSO. ASSERTED ‘DEPT HAD: BROKEN PROMISE

LOCATE WIFE AND: “CHILDREN, REPEATED THAT CHILDREN ONLY. THING -
IN’ WORLD’ THAT MEANT. ANYTHING TO HIM, -THAT “LF HE “COULD NOT
FIND THEM. HE. WOULD TAKE LEAVE OF ‘THIS :WORLD AND WOULD. -

'. TAKE SOMEBODY WITH HIM. EN. LAST MEETING WITH CONSUL - “APRIL 7
_ CONSUL: HAD. TWO MARINE: GUARDS PRESENT VIEW. USAF ‘PSYCHIATRIST’S

ADVISE TO TAKE. NO-.CHANCES, WHATEVER... NAGELL- UPSET BY GUARDS
PRESENCE AND. BY. CONSUL"S. REFUSAL PERMIT HIS TAPING RECORDING

“INTERVIEW. AND. TO. ‘SHOW HIM REGULATIONS PROHIBITING

DEPT. WHAT SPECIFIC STEPS: DEPT -HAD TAKEN. THIS MATTER. NAGEL
--FINALLY SAID HE’ WOULD. LEAVE SPAIN’ BECAUSE OF. CONSULS |

"ACTION (USE OF GUARDS) AND REQUESTED THAT REPLY FROM. ‘DEPT
‘BE FORWARDED PARIS ‘WHERE. HE WAS GOING. ALSO- INFORMED CONSUL

RECORDING. NAGELL.BELABORED PATIENT. CONSUL. FOR NEARLY TWO.
HOURS. CONSUL .INFORMED:.HIM. THAT DEPT .HAD:.:ENDEA VORED LOCATE
WIFE AND CHILDREN WITHOUT SUCCESS, AND ‘PROMISED TO: QUERY . ©

“HE WOULD “GET HIM", BUT. THROUGH POCKETBOOK, BY SUING HIM

IN-US. IN THIS “INTERVIEW. NAGELL DENIED HAVEING MADE THREATS.

OF PHYSICAL VIOLENCE, ONLY."PROMISES”. OF PUBLICITY.AND OF

“PLAYING FOOTSIE: WITH CERTAIN SOURCES": IF - DEPT DID. NOT: LOCATE. . ae
. CHILDREN. “PRIOR DEPARTURE. FROM. MADRID. NAGEL SENT® CONSUL.

POST CARD “WITH MESSAGE. IN JAPANESE LANGUAGE AND WRITING,
WHICH: TRANSLATED ‘MEANS “WITHOUT EYES WE CANNOT SEE", = AND.
SALUATION: IN. SPANISH MEANING “GOOD LUCK".

Se DEVELOPMENTS: OF INTEREST IN LAST. MADRID INTERVIEW: (1)
CONSUL: TOLD.NAGELL GENTLY HE (NAGELL) NEVER EMPLOYED BY. CAS.

NAGELL INSISTED ‘YES, HE COULD PROVE.IT, BUT CONSUL DID
“NOT PURSUE SUBJECT. (2) NAGELL. SEVERELY. CRITICIZED. STATE:

DEPT FOR. PERMITTING CAS. AGENTS INTO. ITS. MIDST: IN: ‘FOREIGN

ESTABLISHMENTS, SAID HE KNEW OF AT LEAST TWO. CAS AGENTS.

IN SWITZERLAND. (3) -NAGELL HAD’. ANOTHER STORY: WHICH. COULD

IN ZURICH AND THAT CAS NOT RPT NOT -SUPPOSED TO HAVE AGENTS,

BE OF INTEREST TO NEWS MEDIA: HE ALLEGED: THAT IN*-195:7 44

“IN TIME OF PEACE”, HE -HAD BEEN COURIER OF TREASURY: PLATES *

me US TO JAPAN. FOR: COUNTERFEITING NORTH: “KOREAN” CURRENCY.. 7

IES, OF “RELEVANT CORRESPONDENCE FOLLOW BY. PoucH.

GPa te. ncalL TFFE

D8) Be - SECRET



--- Page 71 ---
os . _ CONFIDENTIAL §=——-HCF 755 7 Qo
PAGE 1 STATE 959324 oO

17

ORIGIN. SCS 04. 2

INFO EUR 98,SCA’ ‘ol, VA a1, L: 03, CIAE 20, INR. OT, NSAE 00, RSC a1, sDODE 0,
' 4825 R

_ DRAFTED BY: SCA:SCS: AMHARTL

Se

"FM -SECSTATE WASHDC.
_TO-USMISSI ON BERLIN
“INFO AMEMBASSY. MADRID |
-AMEMBASSY PARIS:
_-AMEMBASSY ROME

“eC ON FI DENTIAL STATE “gs9304”

“APPROVED BY: SCS -- HOBART LUPPI

SCS -. WRJOCHIMSEN

DESIRED DISTRIBUTION: EUR/GER a a
66667 ee ee a ;

R 172201Z APR 69

AMCONSUL ZURICH

“ROME FOR VA
REF: BERLIN: 668 RICHARD NAGELL

ode. FEBRUARY 27 AND. 28, 1969 WAGELL CALLED CONGEN - ZURICH .
_ STATING - HE HAD BEEN: ENTICED RETURN US IN 1968 WITH®* PROMISES

IS: WIFE AND CHILDREN WOULD BE LOCATED. ON MARCH-.19- NAGELL

©" APPEARED CONGEN. /BARCELONA REQUESTING INFO RE WIFE AND ;
CHILDREN. 3

"2, cNAGELL APPEARED AT EMBASSY MADRID MARCH 21 WITHOUT FUNDS.
 .REQUESTED HIS SISTER, .MRS. GAMBERT, BE ASKED SEND HIM~DOLS

15 FROM HIS BANK. ACCOUNT. FOR TRUST FUND WITH. DEPARTMENT AND-

“THAT SISTER CASH ‘HIS. MONTHLY: CHECK: FOR: Hye AND CABLE THE

MONEY TO HIM CARE AMEXCO: MADRID. APRIL 3! VISITED : -EMBASSY.

AGAIN RE HIS VA CHECK AND REQUESTED ASSISTANCE ADMISSI' Nee es
-*TORREJON AFBASE HOSPITAL’ FOR QUOTE. NERVOUS CONDITION U QUOTE.

>. ACCUSED DEPARTMENT -AGAIN: OF BREAKING ITS PROMISE HELP HIM.

'. LOCATE WIFE’ AND CHILDREN. LAST CALLED EMBASSY MADRID “APRIL:

“CONFIDENTIAL



--- Page 72 ---
EMR: é

EA SONG ARD CMR ee  . : EES
/D FBI 1 4 Pl NAGELL sRICHARD CASE EX SPO /T MR

/Z 0933602

~~ - +

ae

—
_-.



--- Page 73 ---
13-00000

oe i | Co
“ .. g¢94g°«Ss« epariment of State
Pe PER TOTAL COPIES: — TELEGRAM a

, CABLE SECRETARIAT DisseM By

Fuk 3, Cl

CONFIDENTIAL Hog655
“PAGE @1° BERLIN OB668 1611302

° i ‘al
, ACTION SCS 4

“INFO EUR 17,SCA @1,VA-O1,L @3,INR @7,CIAE @@, NSAE BByP° 04, USIA ‘12,

DODE @6,PPT 02,/051 W
» eens enn e mene ee seen ne 698 B49 : |
R is11a0z APR 69 : oo
FM USMISSION BERLIN
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 4104
INFO AMEMBASSY MADRID
AMEMBASSY PARIS'- —
-.. AMEMBASSY ROME .
“°AMCONSUL ZURICH

“CONFIDENT IA L-BERLIN 2668
ROME FOR VA

SUBJECT: WELFARE: RICHARD» “CASE NAGELL ;
CREF: BERLIN 2567 ee

‘le NAGELL HAS RETURNED TO BERLIN. HE CALLED AT MISSION
APRIL 19 AND AGAIN APRIL.14. SINCE HE WAS OBVIOUSLY IRRAT-
IONAL CONSULAR OFFICER URGED HIM TO CALL ON. ARMY PSYCHIATRIST ; i
IN BERLIN FAMILIAR WITH HIS CASE, -WHICH ‘HE DID APRIL 15. .
_. PSYCHIATRIST SAYS HE IS MENTALLY ILL AND. SHOULD BE HOSP ITAL~ : ; |
.. IZED. : ; ;

20” NAGELL SAID HE RETURNED TO BERLIN BECAUSE HE HAD "CON- .
-NECTIONS” WITH LOCAL PRESS WHO WOULD PUBLICIZE HIS. "COMPLAINTS"
AGAINST US GOVT: (LACK OF MEDICAL AND DENTAL TREATMENT, LACK Lo
OF ASSISTANCE IN LOCATING FAMILY IN US,. “TRUE” ROLE oF. WASH™. Bs

INGTON LAWYER PRICEY NEW »: ETC. de oe

“3. IN VIEW NAGELL® ‘Ss HISTORY OF IMPRISONMENT IN EAST. GERMANY,

-. FORMER INTELLIGENCE CONNECTIONS AND MENTAL CONDITION: (FOR - _ :

. WHICH HE IS APPARENTLY ENTITLED TO FULL VA BENEFITS) WE CON- pore

“ SIDER NAGELL’S PRESENCE IN BERLIN UNDESIRABLE (BOTH FOR HIMSELF . |
AND FOR US GOVT) AND HOPE WE CAN PERSUADE HIM LEAVE. OF HIS — os
‘OWN ACCORD. ANY INFORMATION ON HIS ACTIVITIES SINCE LEAVING

CONFIDENTIAL


--- Page 74 ---
CONFIDENTIAL

_ 803 - Mr. Wallace Clarke © |. * September 5, 1969.
” sy/ess - en 0. Lynch

om: te Bee? : 3 BY

ofl Case

Ta20?

‘Reference is made to your memorandum 2 pril: 25, 1969 ‘concerning your re-
quest to locate Mrs. Mitsuko Takahasi’ AGEL, the wife of, Subject. -

; forts by the SY Los Angeles Field office to locate Nitsuko: Takahashi
ee “ba \GELL, aka Mrs. Richard Case NAGELL, aka Mitsuko . ‘TARAHASHL, wet with
, : negative results: .

S Attached gor your information and tetention. ‘Ls a copy of” an SY menorandun .
dated September 2, 1969 which indicates that an individual identified only ©
as &.C. NAGELL placed an advertisement in the Bast Millage Other, a New
York underground newspaper, which makes obscene reference to both the Central,
Tntelligence Agency and SY. .

Attachment 3

_As atated

‘ee = Central Intelligence Agency V
| United States Secret Service
.. Federal Bureau o£ Investigation

Mr. Johnson - PPT /
OD epee

Bt .
Tie

CONFIDENTIAL

Yat B/W 20I-746 537



--- Page 75 ---
Lo Deda GU RF ORUCROVATY a

“Memorandum el

TO. i Director, 0/SY Ss” DATED September 2, 1969
"Thru: Chief, o/sr/sfW 4 _ a
FROM * EnGaroel 1, o/sy,

“suayeat: Tten in East ¥. Mage Other, “August 20, 2 1969

.° This past’ weekend, I visited a friend who had Gust returned from New -
.. York City, bringing back a copy of a New York underground newspaper
the East Village Other, ‘dated August 20, 1969. :

Out of curiosity, I paged through the. paper and, on page 1, found a

so-called classified section, consisting generally of ads for male and
. female artists models and offerings of books alleged to instruct one |"
in the art. of Syathesizing hallucinogentos. : .
In the” personel. colums of” this section, “the following’ was noted, &
‘verbatin transcript of which is set forth:

f- i - "Caught In The Act. Notice to the CIA and all SY
tet gShitheads who participated in Project Purple Shaft:
After that fiasco in the GIR you worms did your best
to screw, blue and tattoo me. You even tried to have — .
my .ass duSted in. Berlin . 6 » you Purkupse Now its
my turn to do a little shafting.

cordially, R. Ge NAGELL."

: 7 ‘Card indices in SY/E reflect nao indication that anyone named R. C.”
NAGELL or any variation thereof, including NAGLE or. meen” has
ever been granted clearance in this Offices

"A check in SY file’ reflected a record on Richard Case wager, born
August ‘5, 1930, who apprently is identical with the indivi dal who |
'..: authored the above item. A cursory review of the file reflects/that

“!° NAGELL has been of interest to both the FBI and the Department in
7 recent years. i ;

“contain somewhat of an implied threat. For this reason; “the informa
“tion is forwarded for your consideration nd for any action which may:
“be considered necessary. =

. Abbachment: SY file on Richard. Case NAGELL

Group 1
Input to US Defector
mening Bros

Excluded from Automatic Down=-
wa AAT ading and Dgclassification ~
6S egpy  Tading ma cation,

CONFIDENTIAL

Buy U.S, Savings Bonds Regular! th Papell Savings Pan ee
rie cals SePins! Bons Renan on ee nen NS ol = TAS SBT.

“Rate WUE ay



--- Page 76 ---
Department of State |

PERS

CONFIDENTIAL

. HOM23 1.
PAGE O61 MADRID o11@9 252147Z .

BARS _

“ACTION SCS @4

INFO SCA 81,EUR 08, FBI B1,SY 03, PPT. @2,SS0 00, INR: 67, CIAE. 20, NSAE 00, —_
1 035/009 W

we eee ae cea 193695
0 251816Z MAR. 69 ne oe

Fil AMEMBASSY MADRID:

TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5385"

CONFIDENT:
Ne pr = = - 7 ae . : . ot . 7
“SUBJ: NAGELL, RICHARD C. .

-le DOB POB UNKNOWN. RICHARD. C. NAGELL,. PPT J545069, ISSUED ...
5/24/68, ADDRESS 8225 GRAND: AVENUE; ELM “HURST, Ne Ye..115734 ©
' -MISITED. CONSULATE :GENERAL IN "BARCELONA ON MARCH 10,.:AND © s.cc~
-VISITED THE EMBASSY ON MARCH 21. DURING CONVERSATIONS. WITH.
Era S. DRISCOLL CONSUL. OFFICER, NAGELL REVEALED. THE. a
G@ INFORMATI :

be MADRID’ 1109°

2. IN THE SUMMER OF 1968, NAGELL WAS ARRESTED ON A TRAIN ue fe
_ENROUTE TO BERLIN FROM FRANKFURT...HE WAS SUBSEQUENTLY PLACED - i
IN CONFINEMENT IN EAST GERMANY AND HELD THERE AS A PRISONER © 2 ©:
_ UNTIL OCTOBER 1968.. AFTER HE WAS RELEASED, HE CROSSED INTO’.
WEST. BERLIN, WHERE HE WAS DEBRIEFED AT THE'U.S. MISSION BY. °°:
STATE DEPARTMENT REPRESENTATIVES, ONE OF WHOM HE SUSPECTED TO |. ~
BE AN EMPLOYEE OF ANOTHER ‘U.S. GOVERNMENT AGENCY. HE ALLEGED.
THAT HE WAS “WORKED OVER" BY HIS EAST.GERMAN CAPTORS, WHO | .
-” SUSPECTED THAT HE: WAS WORKING ‘FOR ANOTHER U.S. GOVERNMENT
‘AGENCY. NAGELL CLAIMED THAT AT TIME OF HIS ARREST HEWAS 0
TAKEN FROM HIS TRAIN COMPARTMENT "BY. Nate” oN

_ 3. NAGELL CLAIMED THAT DURING DEBRIEFING, HE. WAS: PROMISED.”
» ASSISTANCE IN-LOCATING. HIS CHILDREN WHOM HE SAID WERE. RESIDIN(
-sWITH THEIR MOTHER SOMEWHERE IN THE UNITED. STATES. “HE - :
CLAIMED THE DEPARTMENT HAS ‘NOT KEPT ITS PROMISE, AND DEMANDED
- THAT THE EMBASSY IN MADRID TAKE ACTION TO HELP. LOCATE. : ’
. HIS CHILDREN, WHOM HE SAID ARE THE ONLY THINGS THAT* MEAN -

é a CONFIDENTIAL



--- Page 77 ---
7 ae oO ( ; (
ba _Pepar tment oF State :

. CABLE SECRETARIAT Dissem By’ vt PER & ; - - TOTAL COPIES: T E a E G a AM

—
FILE, RF,

ae 7 CONFIDENTIAL |
| PAGE @2 MADRID 1109. 252147Z
“ANYTHING TO HIM.

4. NAGELL THREATENED 10° HAVE HIMSELF ARRESTED BY SPANISH
POLICE, OR DEFECT TO EAST GERMANY IF HE DOESN’T.RECEIVE
~ “ASSISTANCE FROM U.S. SOURCE. NAGELL CLAIMED THAT HE HAS LEFT

- “VERY AOMPROMISING” CLASSIFIED DOCUMENTS WITH "FRIENDS".

SIN SWITZERLAND WHO. WILL. FORWARD. THEM. TO’. THE .." APPROPRIATE”
PAPER REPRESENTATIVES, ONE OF WHOM HE SAID IS

HOREUL Led WHOM NAGELL - ‘CLAIHED 1s DERSPIEGAL, REPRESENTA.

“RANK OF .CAPTAIN. HE” ‘ALLEGED THAT, HIS ARMY “SERIAL NUMBER: “I
“"@2028346, THAT. HE WAS: DISCHARGED. FROM THE’ ARMY. ON. OCTOBER
1959, AND THAT. HE IS RECEIVING 180 PERCENT DISABILITY: FROM
“THE: VETERANS ADMINISTRATION. - . EE

6. NAGELL EXPLAINED, IN-A RATHER “ART ICULATE MANNER, THAT. HE HAD |
BEEN ARRESTED BY: THE FBI. SHORTLY AFTER. PRESIDENT KENNEDY" $ :
~~ “ASSASSINATION IN’.1963,° AND-THAT -HE: HAD “BEEN. IMPRISONED s..--
wo SUNJUSTLY IN HIS OPINION,» IN THE: FEDERAL -PENITENTIARY,. -
-'" LEAVENWORTH, KANSAS, UNTIL EARLY 1968 AT. WHICH TIME. .HE HA
. BEEN ACQUITTED AND RELEASED. ‘HE SAID THAT. THE REASON WHY ©
“HE HAD BEEN ARRESTED IN THE FIRST PLACE WAS THAT HE HAD- an 3
WORKED: WITH LEE HARVEY OSWALD IN AN ASSIGNMENT WITHA "Us Seol.-
INTELL IGENC AGENC .

“IT WAS.A LONG: ‘STORY, HE SAID, AND HE DID NOT WANT. TO GIVE ME
“ALL THE DETAILS, BUT INSTEAD WANTED | ‘TO ASSURE ME THAT HE HAD :
BEEN IN THE “INTELLIGENCE GAME" FOR ALONG TIME. NAGELL’
.: ALSO STATED THAT HE HAD BEEN HELD IN. THE FEDERAL PENITENTIAR
‘s “FOR: SUCH A. LONG PERIOD BECAUSE HE REFUSED TO REVEAL TO THE™
“FBI ANY INFORMATION. ABOUT..HIS INTELLIGENCE “ACTIVITIES--'
-AND THAT FURTHERMORE HE WAS VISITED BY CIA AGENTS WHILE IN
-PRISON WHO  CAUTIONED HIM TO KEEP. HIS. MOUTH SHUT ABOUT" HIS
TIES WITH. OSWALD. - lols

-. Te REQUEST~COPY © OF ‘om FROM ZURICH TO. DEPARTNENT PERTAINING
TO SUBJECT, AND-REQUEST CHECK OF APPROPRIATE SOURCES IN. NAME :
.OF SUBJECT. AND ADVISE OF RESULTS SOONEST.
“= MCAULTFFE ‘



--- Page 78 ---
‘a . . ; va . ys A ly B YD A ‘a : PS} US LEE
fit Sx 4 . . ae : il Kis
a 2 M6 Hae’
i : _ Original to be Filed in. . Decentrolized Files. FILE pesion ice
i EUR ~ 1 ee nts —
poo ai BACKGROUND USEONLY  conrionurian — JOA DS 1
| INR Py. TANDUING INCICATOR O
_ TO: DEPARTMENT OF “SAVED - 4 w
ZLO9

IFO: BONN cr ji 4 os PHIM. ay: o

Pec.
| | _ : _ lio Distribution

| | re AEBS! iRewcH
Ken | com ee | FROM + USBER, Berlin DATE: October 29, 1968
tag ran | TR SUBJECT : Psychiatrist's Report. on Richard Cas# Nagell,

. i : : US Citizen Released by GDR

, AIR ARMY REF i
: aie : : Berlin A901, October ee

USIA i ES B mo _ .
ee || : LIMIT DISTRIBUTION Ge “copy N _—
wm?

mi A detailed:.statement: prepared by. ‘the: psychiatrist. of

the U.S. Army Hospital in Berlin, dated October 23,

a
_ z. ‘ 1968, has been received on the results of an

mm ee examination of Richard Case Nagell.° ; _
3S & The full text of the psychiatrist's findings is

v transmitted in the enclosure.

10: [aevion| info. fines MORRIS

FO | .

°
a
z

>
2
t . x

Lniclosure aoe

Toxt of péychiatrist's (3. :
findings. :

FILE , : .
in Group 4 - Downgraded at three-year intervals.
Action Tok eee - 8
. sen renee Declassified 12 years after date of origin.

a 2 .

Dare: , CONFIDENTIAL
| FORM
initials: , - |to- RM Os . 323 7

Dralted by: a 5a ting Date: p ‘ontents and lassi icotion Approved by:
LAS:AKlay:dh . 10/28/68 pee LAS:AKlay

MIN:bDKlezn S © - 126%
L\

f
YO

Cleorances:

BACKGROUND USE ONLY .



--- Page 79 ---
i
i
i
i
i
i
1

. Page(_ of 4
BACKGROUND USE ONLY CONFIDENTIAL

LIMIT DISTRIBUTION

Background

My initial contact with Mr. Nagell was when he was expelled
-from the DDR by the East German officials who forcibiy
-propelled him toward us over «he borderline into West Berlin, |
As we initially escorted Mr, Nagell back to US Army Lospital
Berlin in the US Mission vehicle, he seemed unsure of where ;
he was, and who we were, as well as being angry and belligerent
about his treatment by the East Germans, In the course of

the two hour interview which was then conducted at the
hospital, Mr. Nagell gradually regained his composure and

gave a more cooperative and coherent history. At his ;
insistance, the interview took place in the presence of the -
attorney Mr._Ricey S. New, Jr., who acted in an unofficial
capacity as a legally oriented "friend."

The salient aspects of Mr. Nagell's history are as follows.
He says he was on active military duty (Army) from 1948 until”
1959, For the first. three of these years. he: was. an: enlisted:
man, and“ for-the- last six he was an officer, working in
military intelligence. In 1954‘he was the sole survivor in
.a plane crash which resulted in a brain concussion, umerous
‘physical injuries, and prolonged military hospitalizetion.
Nr. Nagell now claims that he believes it was this head
injury which resulted in his "unstable personality and
immature or impulsive behaviour." life attributes to this
‘instability his marital difficulties and his decision tc
resign his commission in 1959, something which he now considers
unwise. At the time of his leaving the service he was not”
awarded a disability pension, but he says that he was later

able to successfully petition the VA for a "t4% disability."

He claims that he had never seen a psychiatrist during his
military “career. - . cons

From 1999 to 14962 he says that he worked for the Stave of
California as.an investigator for various bureaus, itis
marital difficulties had increaseu and his wife insists:
- separation, keeping with her their two children,:
says that one night in 1962 he became intoxicated, and tried.
to break down the door.to her apartment, On this basis he
_says he lost his job and says that for the next. year ‘he
“"just drifted," apparently without motivation to worl,
supporting himself on- his disability pens sion.and financial
aid from his: sister, Me is not certain about whether or not
the divorce from his wife has ever been legally compieted,

CONDIDENTIAL
“ACKGROUND USE ONLY


--- Page 80 ---
. ; re [eu
BACKGROUND USE ONLY. a Pag. 2 of %
CONFIDENTIAL
° LIMIT DISTRIBUTION

In September 1963 he was accused of committing an act which
he now says was bred out of his feeling of hopelessness
and desperation, le claims that in a confused way he
attempted while armed to rob a bank and was easily appre-
hended. For the next 4 1/2 years followed a complicated
series of trials, appeals and retrials, In addition to
spending these years in prison, he also-had at least three
prison hospitalizations for psychiatric observation. His
appeals apparently hinged on his contention that he was
“temporarily insane" at the time of the crime. le was not
considered insane. at any time during his imprisonment, and
his claim to temporary insanity found support in the expert
testimony of a noted American neurologist, Dr. Edwin
Weinstein, Dr. Weinstein apparently interpreted HNagell's
EG's (electro-encephalograns) as being abnormal and argued
that Nagell had developed a "paranoid personality, and
instability" on the basis of his brain injury. This conten-
tion was apparently disputed by other expert witnesses, but
in. any. case- Nagell..was: officially: acquitted: ron: April” 29° of
‘this year, .

Nagell says he then went to the New York area, where his
“ sister (his closest relative) resides, but. he claims an
_ ©: additional complication in his life had risen in that he
-““had once been an "acquaintance" of Lee Harvey Oswald, and
had been implicated ina possible plot to assassinate
_ President Kennedy in an article in RAMPARTS magazine which

appeared in January. 1968. Mr, Nagell firmly denies that he

. Was _involved—in_any way with any such conspiracy, and was.
.in fact imprisoned at the time of the assassination, On
the basis of thi na t

Me,

and in some haste left the countr for a tour. of Europe. :

i » gncieROUND USE ONLY
| wo . - CONFIDENTIAL

Garrison, the attorne eneral from New Orleans who is



--- Page 81 ---
ie
p.
i.
ia

~ BACKGROUND USé ONLY

‘oo iy BER" ON A=, YON |,
“8 : . - Pah 3 of &

CONFIDENTIAL

LIMIT DISTRIBUTION

in June,. shortly thereafter, he discussed with an “Ameri¢an
consular official in Zurich his recurrent fear that the

CIA was going to "hit" him. His next travel point was to

West Berlin, and on June 11, 1968, while his train was
traversing the. DDR, he says that he was taken off the
train and "dllegally detained, He is not certain why he

‘was taken off the, train but admits to having talked freely

on the train to other passengers: about his life history,

and he was also carrying with him a -héavy portfolio of all
of his Army and government records involved with his service
career, disability, and imprisonment, For several mcnths
Nagell. claims that he was interrogated by the Last Germans .
and repeatedly asked to confess his role as a spy or govern-
ment agent. Lventually, Nagell says that he concluded the
only way to be released would be to feign mental illness,
which he says he proceeded to do, This was several weeks

. ago and he says he was soon examined by an East German

psychiatrist and events were set in motion which culminated .
in. his: release ‘today,. four: and:-one-haLlf. months « after:his:
detention began. :

Mr, Nagell's: plans for the future center around returning.

to the United States and beginning an appeal to the govern-
ment to grant him 4 psychiatric disability pension, as well
as for his physical disability, on the basis of his head
injury. He no longer believes that it is realistic to think

that the CIA was trying to kill him.

Mental Status. Exam

Mr. Nagell is a ‘tall, 38 year old male who shows the evidence
of a prior head injury in the form of extensive scars on

the left side of his, face, facial asymmetry gue fo seventh<—
nerve injury, reconstructive surgery on his left ear, ete

In addition he shows some healed incisions on his left wris st
which he claims were superficial lacerations self-inflicted
at the time of his first imprisonment in 1963, and again a
few weeks ago in the DDR. He denies that in either instance
he seriously intended to kill himself. He is of superior
intelligence and shows: a remarkable memory for dates. and

» “names, Initially hé was belligerent, angry,.and suspicious
of every effort made to help him. Over the span'of two

hours, he gradually became more cooperative and rational.
He is in his own terms a "chronically paranoid person" by-

* which he means that he is always highly suspicious and tends

to impute intentions where none may‘exist. Despite his

CONTIDLNTIAL

BACKGROUND USS ONLY



--- Page 82 ---
Se wives . ao : co ] .
- ND YE Page Wf &
BACKGRON ' CONFIDENTIAL

LIMIT DISTRIBUTION
overall suspiciousness, and his fears about the CIA, there

‘“was no overt evidence of psychosis. His nutritional state
“and general well- ~being both appeared. to be good,

= Summary

In summary then we seem to be dealing with a. -person who has

had a personality disorder for a number of years, manifested
-. by emotional instability, impulsive behaviour, a tencency
“to be litigious, and a general suspicious or. paranoic¢
orientation, It is difficult to know how much of whet he
-. is saying is factual, but it may be that in June of this

- year he was becoming "borderline" or even delusional in his
thinking about possible attempts on his life, and this
“probably explains his flight to Europe. Currently, he is
not psychotic and seems competent in a ‘legal and psychiatric

". sense to negotiate’ his own affairs and: be a free citizen

- again.

His own, closing: words provide:.a ‘Lighter note to what” other~

wise has been a complicated and serious. mishap. "Well, I'll
tell you one'thing, that's the last time i ever take a train
through East Germany i"

/s/ .

George R, Babineau
CPT, MC
Psychiatrist
U.S. Army Hospital, Berlin

BACKGROUND USE ONLY

CONFIDENTIAL


--- Page 83 ---
13-00000

721419454 :
~-------~-------------~--NI-- 1/ ND--U/ ND--$ A-~CO0--—-=- ---- |
WEINSTEIN, EDWIN

“WEINSTEIN,EDWIN A _ -_ “OS 65 €463298 , |
7B 18FECO9 CMAKA NEB /L 65MD BETHESDA. |
LZ VANSA SS

ne

63€3001-1999



--- Page 84 ---
13-00000
“Ee
ia

15584 Department « vr State

PERS 20%

NVITEQ RICEY NEW AND

: MISSION OF

ui a me OCT: @Bex STANGE ore eR en OU
“AUTOMOBILE. ACCIDENT. LAST. WEE Es

L. DESCRIBED

RE L CONDITION AS

eat sean nia ah

ag aie NEW. WHO WILL. BE: ACCOMPANIED BY MISG1ON OFF
Ht GHIATRIST. US ARMY HOSPIT Alyy BERLIN! BR LON

$e 12988: 25x (=H

CO with concurrence of —__———- ‘oan ‘Obtwi

a_ee
IPS/CRAR vy_ 2 a Date rE wef =



--- Page 85 ---
| Department of State

“STILE BOTH CASES BUT VOGEL ‘EXPECTS TO HAVE IN

NEAR FUTURE “BASIC DOCUMENTS WHICH ARE. STILL . IN: HANDS, OF,

STATE. SECURIT AUTHOR]. TIES” AND. WILL: INFORM : USsisigs:.
oy wet : ore ih



--- Page 86 ---
13-00000

1 .
AS MISSTGN AWARE FROM. PREVIOUS "EXPERIENC
AS ALONG HISTORY «OF PSYCHIATRIC. PROBLEMS AND.
DIFFICULTIES IN MANY COUNTRIES OVER

“TS CURRENTLY” UNDER INDICTMENT:-FOR VI0~=
USC, SECTION 15420. A WARRANT -HAS. BEEN ISSUE

“MOST. RECENT EPISODE: OF ‘WHICH DEPARTMENT: AWAR

ON. FROM -CZECHOSLOVAKIATO FRG: IN APRIL. THI:
JAMES". ADVENTURES AND! ARRESTS: 1s BEING
NFORMED RLCEY: NEW:IN-



--- Page 87 ---
13-00000

Department of State

TOTAL COPIES:

PERS

“.€ BECRETAMAT DiASEM BY
Sere aeay Dineen BY.

‘CASES 86 MISSION OFFICERS SHOULD NoT INDICATE PRIOR KNOWLEDGE:
NAGEL RELEASE OR JAMES LATEST ARREST.::


--- Page 88 ---
13-00000



--- Page 89 ---
13-00000

- 4194) and was assigned to Militery lntelligence Training <

SECRET

- Chief, Research Branch, SRS 8 MAR 1968 *

Robert J J . Leonard

John Richard. 8LOS3

| $34490

GIST: SLOSS; a ataff employee cince 1948, has recently been

’ repelygraphed with inconclusive results, baving reacted to questions

regarding disclosure ef classified informetion, avsociation with ¢ com-
munist sympathizer, and homosexuality. He has alao been involved

with cooperation in an extramarital affeir which {chiminated in a black-

mail attempt. on one ef the parties. His name is perhaps identical with

& nAme among six names of Agency empleyees found ‘on a. mentally dis-
turbed and digaffeeted former CIC intelligence olficerwho alleges contact.
with Russian and Guben Intelligence agents. Detalis of theese questionable

‘areas in regard to GLOSS are set forth below.. Recommend intensive and

thorough investigation of SLOSS including surveillance of activities.

DETAILS: 1. Mr. John Richard $LO383, born 24 September Ing
et Cleveland, Obi “Ghio, has been a ‘etaff employes of this Agency since 1948.
Hig parents are American born. He graduated {rom Yale University in.

Ritchie, Maryland, as an instructor, from January 1943 te July 1945.

He attended Columbia University, School of International Affairs and the
Ruseian Institute from 1946 to 1948,, receiving an M.A. Degree in inter-
national Affaire. .

2. SLOSS is currently a Special Intelligence Duty Officer in

. OGI, GS-14, During his assignment in Geernany 1953-1955: and on a TDY

to Germany in 1938,,he had been authorised to deal with foreign latelli-
gence elements in the OCl overseas Maison program. 51085 was poly-.

graphed in 1950 and 1953 with favorable results; in 1953 with unfavorable

fesulte; and twice in 1964 with inconclusive results regarding giving CIA
documents or classified information to unauthorized. persons, contact _
with a pozsible communist sympathicer, and engaging in homosexual acti-
vities since working for CIA... He was granted a "Q" Clearance in October

1963, _His Top Secret Clearance waa certified to the White House on 23.

n
. _lleclae sification

neo



--- Page 90 ---
13-00000

| — ai  SEERET

Febreary 3968 an connection with s viait t0 to: a Presidentia! relocation site, —

_ghould have been in the possescion of Richard ‘Gave NAGELL. - ‘The weird.
. Story of NAGELL is contained ime a chronological Hoting of bis activities
appended to this memorandum, -

4 A Feview of the’ Security fe on SLOSS in connection with the
¢.SLO86, os the past few: years,
: ie

adulterous relationahp ¢ 3
_ fice, sesigned to OCI and fire Coety BARK
Central:

- Felatlonship betw. fem 12 October © dipcieeéa on 19 May 1964 ,
Zelatenshlp borrenion to the Office of Security that Mra. (BARKER/had
_ wecelved a strange telephone call frem an unknown male on. 18 May 1964
_who advised her that he knew what wae gig. on See een a oe her boy
Prabars rae i :

-Feoulted in a blackmail attempt againet her tn Bay 1964,

6. Of particular concern should be the: results of the latest
of which. ‘bee

.. deemed to be inconclusive. .

1 During the 1955 polygraph examinatt

' to. homosexual desixes but stated that: ‘these had 3
problem: and had never reguited in bis. participati

- During the 24 April 1964 examination, ‘the Subjec
— actions: to the. homosexual ‘question which indicat deception. \Dastog



--- Page 91 ---
further specie questioning on 22 May 1964 covering : the 1 vapioas homosexual
areas however, there were no strong reactions to indicate that Subject raight
- be practicing deception on the specific question regarding engaging in home-
sexual activities since working for GIA,

.& In connection with the phage of questions concerning contact
with any possible communist sympathizer, the Subject reflected overall
disturbance indicating that all the questions obviously bothered himant =
that deveption was being practiced within that phase. The polygraph operas.
tor acted that there were watutending reactions te the following ‘two questions:

20 b "Othes than yout somments about FISHER, during your.
vadergraduate period at Yale did you have any contact
with any Comrounist. or Communist sympathizer?

Answer: No, ®

2e ‘During your CLA employment, have you had any contact
7 with ; any Communist or Communist armpathiser? .

Angeert No."

en Sor so particularly noteworthy that during his examination on
22 May ‘1964 when asked nine questions ap te whether he had been acquaint-
ed with certain individuals, ‘only teacted whan be answered "ao"
‘to hoving heen scquainted with erry. SEVERN and Lya WOLSTON, . These
wares had been submitted to Subject based upon pure conjecture that there:
‘possibly might have bean some connection with there individuals at Camp
Ritchie Military Intelligence Training Genter, Since the fact that-both — sone >
Jerry SEVERN and Dya WOLSTAON have cooperated with Soviet intelligence
should have been unknown to SLOSS and he declared he is not acquainted ;
with them,. there should have been ao yeason for him to react to these names.
Zhe polygraph Operator states that SLOSS was not pressed further regarding
FISHER. {whem he had cheracterised as “leit of center") or his own possible
knowledge of SEVERN or WOLSTAN ‘gince it was obvious that SLOSS was. - ©
-  beginaling to fee] harassed on this matter and stated that he did not enjoy
- being asked these questions.

. 10, During SLOSS! interview on 4 April 1964 SLOSS reflected
consistent ‘renctinns on the: questions: .

“Since working for CIA,have you: given CIA documents er
classified information to unauthorized persons?"

‘-3-

OO000-E1L


--- Page 92 ---
13-00000

"Have you ever ‘deliberately given classified information on er
documents to any wnauthorised person?" -

- . In explanation, Subject said he wae bothered by this idea, ‘bat
that he had no:knowledge of any particular aifuation wherein-he had dt-
-Walged information to anyone whe was unauthorised to receive it or whe
would have used it against the Agency's interest, On the test administered.

- On 22 May 1964 to resolve. any possible gompromise to communist or foreign
intelligence organizations, it was determined that there were. no significant
reactions to relevant questions du thie area. : .

; a. It should be. especially noted that the polygraph operator.during
the 4 April 1964 interview, detected an odd emell on Subjest's breath and -
noted his Mushed face, frequent silly grins and lethargic movements, eug-
" gesting thet the Subject may have been. slightly intexicated.. The operator
‘did not ask during this interview whether the Subject had: takenany drug:
or alcohol prior to the interview but recalled an incident wherein the Gub~-
ject when arrested for drunken driving in 1963 bad produced evidence that
he wae & a diabetic and had taken: medication prior te: tis incident. - - Gonse«

cation for diabetes ‘dn November 1963. He explafiiad that he took three or.
four diuretic pille. He. specifically denied that he bad taken any other drug,
' ‘*axreotic or alcohol, When this question was asked during interrogation, .
; he sefiected reaction indicative of deception and then admitted that fox
bee breakfast he bad taken one glass of vodka with some orange fulce. He
. atated that he drank vodka for breakfast sometimes: whenever he waa tense
or nérvous. over anything. ©

‘The polygraph operator & in hie report concluded that the
 wswalidity of final test charts le held in question and there is no
. strong evidence that the specific areas of concern have been
eoncluaively resolved at this time. It ie recommended that a_
further atudy be conducted on this case and that information
; a - Feeulting from such a study be went to IRD for possible reinter+
ce view of the Subject and pelygraph resolution". :

3. SLOSS. has indicated reactions. indicative of deception during
the polygraph examinations. In oné epecific question where these re-
actions were present, -he admitted to lying.. This was in the question as
to whether or not he had taken any alechol prior to the examination.:

=<

SEGRET-



--- Page 93 ---
13-00000

eSB,

- GONCLUSION:

‘ “SLOSS has lied in his most recent ‘polygraph examination and
has evidgneed izidications of deception in areas concerning divulging |
¢lassified information to unauthorized individuals, association with a.

: ‘communist ‘sympathizer and homopexual inclinations. SLOSS! reaction

ei etry SEVERN and ya WOLSTON has not been fully ox~
. ygraph operater has recommended further investigation.
and a Fepolygraph because the recent tests are iaconelusive.

2. SLOSS has been involved im an immoral and Wegai extras
_ marital activity between a Staff employee and a former Staff employee:
where. One of: the parties was subjected ton blackmail attempt.

"8. The zame z $088 (peesibly identical to Subject) appeared
on a Het of GIA. employees: found on the person ofa self-designated "dis-

. affected American" arrested by the FBI for bank robbery in September
1963. Thin individual (mentally disturbed) with previous intelligence ex-.
perience has declared that he was approached by Soviet Intelligence while
and/or after he wan in Mexico City in September 1962., 7

a ‘It ie suggested that the extent of the adverse. security implica
‘tiene concerning SLOSS ie mich, that if SLOSS in ever found to be a security
rik, the fallure at this time to purstis an aggressive investigation of ali
his contacts and activities to resglve ali.areas of doubt could possibly lesd
to a donchision that we have been semies in our duticn. The undersigned
recommends the following action:

®. That phyaieal and technical surveillance of at least two ee
weeks duration be made of SLOSS to determine his contacte and
activities after working houre. _

b. That current géven way National Agency Checks be made
en a BLGGE

: : Richard B, FISHER, a friend of SLoss', characterized.
by him ‘ag having been involved in radical and left of center ideas”
while en undergraduate at Yale,be fully identified, his present lo--
cation be ascertained and the degree of his association with aiz-0ss
be determined by a personal interview with FISHER.

d. That Richard Case NAGELL be personally interviewed by

the undersigned in the hope that by a sympathetic approach he may
reveal how he came into the possession of the name J, SLOSS and

other employees of CIA. .

abe



--- Page 94 ---
13-00000

a



--- Page 95 ---
13,00000

a

REV FW PROGRAM
RELEASE IN FULL 1998

EVIE



--- Page 96 ---
13,00008 @

we bY
en

» *

FD-204 (Itev, 3-3-50)

Copy fo:

Report of: *

Date:

Field Office File No.: :

, Character: |

Synopsis:

eee

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT: OF JUSTICE
FEDERAL. BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION

THOMAS J, DOWLING Off: New York, New York .

"MARZ AGU . .
an
~ 6523126 oo . _ ~ Bureau File No.:

ICHARD CASE NAGELL

“Qeir~ 7407 57

: ESPIONAGE - X

Confidential informants familiar. with certain

' preses of Cuban and/or Communist activities in

the NYC area, when contacted during February, —
1964, advised ‘thatthe subjesct'is unknown

to them. Subject's AVAT Hrs. ELEANORE GANBERT

when interviewed on 2/28/64, advised that subject
‘last stayed at her home @uring the latter part. —
of 1962. ‘She indieated that she: knows of no
subversive activity on the part of the subjeet,
and stated further that she would. ave nothing.
to do with him if she. ever found out he had

ever been: involved: in such activities, She.
‘advised subject maintains a metal-type foot.

“locker at her residence, and has maintained it _

at her home for a number of years. She hoted _
that she does not: know the eontents of. this.

. . foot loeker nor. is she even aware: of whether

at. is opened. or "leaked. ;

AELEASE IN PART

FATAL DENIAL.

Sc av eA A ALS Re ia Bre

eet eo ein, OE Ronee eee, Foe SM bce eee eee eT eT ee eed ae ee ee tte Thee tet Te weer oY Te eee

wats


--- Page 97 ---
13-00000

NY 65-23126

oe “Confidential-informants fami
phases: of Cuban and/or Communist activ
area, when ‘contacted during February,

“the. subject. is. unknown to.them. ©...

liar with certain
ities. in the NYC” —

1964, advised that —

REID Ue Te ee

oa stent ats eed Be Bibel

sas Hata.


--- Page 98 ---
13-00000

t

“February 28, 1964, -
her as. Special agents Of: ‘the Federal Bureau of Davestigation.

1. PD-B02 (Rev. 1-25-60) FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGA™ JN

i
Date

pert,.was contacted.at her hone.

d Avenue, Queens, New York, on

y Special Agents Thomas J. Dowling:
» Who identified themselves to ~

Eleanore.
located at 62-25. &

She was told.that the. Special Agents wished to talk to her
about her brother, Richard Case Nagell; that she would not.
‘have to. speak with the interviewing ‘agents; that ing
she might. say could be used in courts. and that she.

--@ right to counsel before making. any. statement, ‘Nes.

Gambert: advised that she had no objection to being interviewed
and. that she would cooperate in any way” ‘possible. 7

cis ‘she: advised. that her. brother, Richard. Case. :
Nagell, last’ resided with her in her home for.a 5 or 6 ae
weak period which ended just prior. to Christmas, 1962..
While in New York, he was for the most partunployed. and
seeking a position. She noted that he did obtain a os

-. position as a store. detective but that this lasted.

for only several days when ‘he decided that. this was not
the type of investigative. work. he. wanted to: do.. oy :

‘When questioned. as to whether or not she knew
oft activity on the part.of her brother which could ~~

have | Of a subversive nature, she stated that she -

knew of no such activity; that she did not believe her .
brother. capable of taking part in such activity; and
‘that if she ever became aware that he was engaging at —
any time in such activity she would have nothing to. do
with him.. At this point she noted that approximately —.

- &@ month prior to the interview she had received several

lettersthat were returned to her from E] Paso, Texas,:
which’ she had written to her brother, indicating that:
he’ was: no longer at. the: El Paso County Jail. She

' subsequently received: a letter fran her brother indicating —
that: he: was. at. the: Medical Center. for Federal’ ‘Prisoners,

" Springfie

a Migsourt.. , She noted that she ‘newered this oo
letter inmediately, ” (as ard. frogher= =.

Ama ey

f te adeeb as tenses ute bene: tutta : cosines ¢

Se SAPO A oh ba Nae el ok Et

f.
i


--- Page 99 ---
13-00000.. . . ae
0000. ae LAY,

In

i NY 6865-23126:

a ; brother. She stated that she expected to hear from her
an brother immediately after he received her letter and the
. - facet that she has not heard has made.her uneasy. she
ce noted that she offered, if permitted, to visit him, and
ee _ that she hoped to ascertain as a result of this visit,
the reason he attempted to rob a bank in El Paso, Texas,
on September 20, 1963. She advised that she has had no
reason to believe that her brother is not responsible for
his actions, and she noted that in one letter he wrote.
' to her that the bank robbery attempt was a pre-meditated
action on his. part. She advised that. her brother has
‘peen ina depressed state of mind ever since he had been
a accused of taking a bribe and fired from his position -
fhe with the California State’ Liquor. Authority. She noted
- +. that she believed,.as her brother claims, that this
“ purported bribe was set up to remove her brother from his
' position with. the.California State Liquor Authority
. pecause of. his honesty and failure to handle investigations

as instureted by. superiors.

wnen. questioned as to whether or not her brother,
_ Richard Case. Nagell,' maintains any type of property at her
“ @ . residence, she-advised that be does maintain a military |
. type. metal. foot locker, and that he has maintained it at.
; |, her residence-since his. discharge from the United
: ' Btates. ‘Army. She noted that as this foo locker is — -
G property, she is ‘not’ eware of its contents,
at ag nism mementoes of his

hl se

OTT ass oe esr nm ei ot Sf a ead HG

Q
3

h


--- Page 100 ---
13-00000

UFEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION.

1y working” for Soviets.
7 xe Pubgaceninas Bay, Pines’, 2 F 2

cranosd features." Asked Far

. hla document, ce, AUIS. conclusions of the wg GR... eters Sy ot the FRI and Is loaned to ‘your vaseney: it .od

ergs M- RS pscetiaen are not to be distributed dutside youir agency.

Pt bf Ho S



--- Page 101 ---
pase. fennect ion

President:



--- Page 102 ---
hron logical’ Record of Subject 's Background

nd Aftermath



--- Page 103 ---
13-00000

‘hinted: per might. have ‘peen nk robbery/"ch ‘to go
ind that: “he. really. did not: have’ othe. intention. of. .

which. the. subject shad “on ‘his ‘person ‘
eto Medical Aid, to Cuba, Pair Play ‘for Cuba

between ‘Communist: party ic) and: Socialist. ‘Workers
Party . sup) elements | to. exert their power within ‘the.
TP ‘policy + “However, “during

etal effort by FPCC ‘leadership. to. minimize the |.
of: these and other. organizations in the FPCC SO.



--- Page 104 ---
13-00000

TP "PED" LEE,
“This” source. observed

RK. review on October ar, 1963, ‘of the Military
erords. ‘on file at. the. Military Personnel Records
‘Louis ; Missouri: , indicated that. RICHARD CASE,
ebiel: “Number 12°115 891, enlisted in the United:
my - on “August: 5, 1948. i :

28, 1954. to Ap: 8 1955 “

on ‘September 30, 1963, EP. T1 furnished the followi
on. regarding - RECHARD: CASE. NAGEL:

“the subject: underwent: treatment: ar” “the Walter Reed
Vashington,. De mor asia’ resmlt: of: an. ‘airplane erash

ember 28, ‘1954, in cwhich the’ Y subject “was involvéd.::°:/

. The: subject



--- Page 105 ---
13-00000

then contacted. ‘on september 30, 1963, EP. T-1 “was:
the ‘opinia, ‘that. the: subject, Still, apparently. needed ~
hiat ie: utreatment. He Said: he. Was unable to evaluate
, t's setivities subsequent ‘to 1955: in. “view, of the
“eon! “been | made. with: the | Subject: sine

“In April, “956, , Captain | ‘CHARLES STANLEY , Administrative
iice Detail, Los: Angeles Police Department, Los Angeles ,. aie
liferaia, advised ‘that one RICHARD, Ce NAGELL had questioned



--- Page 106 ---
date at “Fort: Berni!
‘an officer, he, :

indicated: that NAGELL ‘genved
th
Winter Campaign in Korea, - “the. Korean Summer
2 in’ 1952. the: ‘Third Xorean Winter: ‘Campaign . in

2 United: Stat ® Sumner-Fall Campaign in. 19535"

the National néfense Service’ Medal, “the United. Wations Service

Médal, ‘the Bronze Star ‘Medal, the Purple Heart. With two. Oak’
: usters,. the “Expert Infantry - Badge, the. Parachute .

the Combat Infantryman’ Ss Badge, and. the | Republic

iciency: ratings. ranged from:
upEror, and there: cis. ‘no- record of courts-martial
“without. official ‘leave. E

Be

: His ‘character’ ‘and ‘e!
iinknown to
r absence



--- Page 107 ---
31 ille,. “plorida,. that. ne began.
te ‘Beverage - Department

“On “Decembe 15, “Y962, ‘the ‘subject. “advised ‘special

‘Agents: ‘of ithe FBI in, ‘Jacksonville, Florida, ‘that in June,

962,, he-was- accused. ‘of -taking a $20,000. bribe ‘by: the. State

everage. ‘Department, Los” Angeles, California, and: was” :

eleased. ‘from his” employment. on. June 8, 1962). for refusing
sto: answer questions :: ‘The subject said he’ talked to: the FBI
in. ‘Los Angeles’ regarding ‘the. possibility. of nis dismissal
being ay violation, of. his” civil rights;



--- Page 108 ---
1962. to July 23 “ 1203.

stic’ argument: and; as,
and he was arrested -

aoee a detasiea information.

_NAGELI. advised that he then went to: his
and. ‘advised - them ‘of what had happened. © ‘AB oa result of ail

_this, “NAGELL stated he. was “placed on: suspension on-June 8,
> 1962, on: “charges of - ‘creating: a disturbance for being” drunk

5 superiors

of

Be



--- Page 109 ---
18-00000

He. noticed | an automobile: on tWO. ‘occasions
: and at. about 8: 00° PH stopped: his” car on: the
ry pear. Malibu, California.’ Two" men fron” the: car”
into, his. ear, They. were dressed in. business . suits,
“were. police. officers. One 0

fficers. — He: Stated that
hy. he was. Shots. aot

‘ “Social Security card, and ‘Selective’ ‘Service:

/ ‘NAGELL stated that on July 25,.1962, he
received. a “money order. fron a, relative, and ‘pécause | he had
no: identification was” unable. “to cashit? - He. advised, ‘thats he

5a. quick temper, and that ‘this situation ‘made: ‘him. “hot!
the collar.” For this” ‘reason. he contacted the FBI

5

ra



--- Page 110 ---
OONAGELL, “in “satisfactory. ‘condition in. Veteran
isn't talking according. to. police.

; M “MAXWELL: ‘said he received a ‘all Monday
: NAGELL ’ asking “that the: California Central Investig
nd déntification: Bureau’ be notified that. he” had. ‘bee

“A few. moments ‘later, ‘av second call came in. from.
aitness | who: ‘said: that. a man suffering. from a bullet: -wound
chad. driven. up to him and asked for. directions to a
ital. od . Oo

vat the. Veterans, Hospital, officers: found:



--- Page 111 ---
13-00000

ng tréated. for: ‘wounds: + am a ‘bulle

‘or cels fornia ‘as a Special. Investigator .- He stated.
a result. of his investigation. ‘of. some large cafes ©
Vand: bars. in the ‘Los. Angeles. ‘ayea, one of which -he named. as
fhen ‘Mauna’ Loa, and ‘some ‘controversy which, he” bad. vbad with



--- Page 112 ---
hat ‘on August’ 6,
hearing so. that. ‘be

18 vee old): ‘until October ‘29, "1959, ‘and: had held - “tho ron
of: ‘Capt in “sivea "ant the: ages of. 22 and. 29.94 stated ‘that



--- Page 113 ---
he pads ‘the



--- Page 114 ---
13-00000

“1982, ‘this: ‘same, “individual reappéared
and wanted to know’ what. had’ been’. done

Be was told. that “at. his



--- Page 115 ---
13-00000

h had been permitted” ‘to’ make statemen son. the



--- Page 116 ---
On: November: 16; .1962,

the: subject. advised. 1. Special:
tithe New: York. City “Office of. ‘the FBI.

that he.wa



--- Page 117 ---
1B-00000

mn . "New: ‘York, telephone number HA, 6-6830, .
empting ‘to. obtain’ employment: in. the New York. area.

. The. following information was. presented. -by. NAGELL -
ete ‘the interviewing Special. “Agent. on. _two. typewritten sheets



--- Page 118 ---
13-00000

, Sh i ack oF this- resulted
i department ; ‘regardless

prac ; : i verage - ‘licenses, “put vho: it
wiied ‘businesses; “part. or completely, which were.
for which: ‘were i

Rudy Cleye:
* Sam. Cuda a
Louis | Dragna



--- Page 119 ---
Date Room.
#1. Rancho:
Harold" s:
It: Club:
The Largo .
Nauna-loa

‘The subject, stated that he believed that. the.
Court of “Los Angeles ‘County did: not: give him a-
ance © to.. be heard: when it. grented ‘his. ‘wife: MUTSUKO:
(nee teen at an interlocutory. divorce | decree on,



--- Page 120 ---
“t at the actual. trial 1 wourd not take. ghey December

AO FUJESANT
. University

e. by. the. State ! Reverage Department: and was released ‘fre
“employment. on dune” 8, 1962; “for refusing to “answer:
eae th He- ‘stated he’ talked ‘to. the’ FBI in. Los Angeles



--- Page 121 ---
13-00000



--- Page 122 ---
13-00000

e: clinical “record

HIS’ RY OF Piguet: This’ 32 year ola white mal

He claims: t hese since ‘an: : airplane accident: he had: had i



--- Page 123 ---
13-00000

‘patient with: periods of’ depression. during” which | he
and sometimes’ Said that he wishes he were dead. Orner.
Dok. angry: and an Reis. well oriented an

: lood 0 Af seen 120/80,. pulse 68, “height 6a '
pounds. Pupils, are. equal and - ‘normal. reaction. to.

Lungs are. y clear... ‘Heart

at enytha No. edema. “Abdomen: is; ‘fla
masses: “and organs. not palpable. . Neurological :
z a left: facial. arte fund! was

“ray

dally: negatives RKG: Mor al. EEG ‘without a definite
The® “Spinal. ‘fluid: shows. a total protein: ‘of.

ithout, any - increase of. globulin, . 1 “ymph, and. :

rene was. 80 mm hot. water. “Routine

th” “nein to integrate ‘and a ‘waxing ‘and waning of
: aid resemb1. thats seen ain ‘epileptoid

‘patieat “IN. ‘HOSPITAL: During ‘the: tine che was in. ‘this! ‘ward



--- Page 124 ---
13-00000

efused to: eaeetbae he. warn te hospitals saying tha
e re “ : He. relates. ‘that he. aid

e ‘Stated: ‘Nothing? “that: they: give.
After’ several days, of. listening



--- Page 125 ---
“He further. related. ‘that, he keeps. everythin
tle book | that. he- has done ‘or said because he has. a poo)
Ithough *s some. . of: these. memory deficits. were not broug t
‘he. interview. ‘with him.. He” “was, advised: to. Stay: ‘on: the

ince “his’ insight and. judgment were: unpredictable at: times:
nd: a fhough no psychotic, behavior was noted; at was felt



--- Page 126 ---
13-00000

eo 1963, the subject was contacted
“ial Agents of | the Miami; Florida;. Office of ‘the =
Northeast. Lest. ‘Avenue: and Fifth Street, Miami,


--- Page 127 ---
very. reluctant to ) furnish any Angora.

Squor. ‘Control. Office, ‘State: ‘of:

‘nia, Los “Angeles Office, and ‘a. former ‘Captain: ‘in.
“the United: States Army: with. experience. in, intel ligenc
‘work: with’ the’ GIG... - ; pres,

‘Subject. ‘Stated he: wished ‘te ‘be. ‘advised ' at he was
‘iven: am pistol with a: silencer. and: possibly. some “microfilm.
. y source Ss ~ Coban,: Russian or both = from Mexico City ‘throug!
cA. Cuban in Miami. - if he” would be permitted to return: these |
i tems: to, his. contact ‘so. he could: be of. further” use to the***:
d States Government... Subject stated he did not want, to
‘coop rate fully with: ‘the, United States : Government or anyone

determining what ‘the: enemy’ ‘is up to. than: “the: “agencies regularly
‘handl ag ‘these matters, except the FRI. “He @ stated the FB

pio age statutes - ee the registration. ‘act: "together: with.
other: laws were: explained to ‘him and he. acknowledged: he'was .
fully aware of ‘their’ Provisions. : .

= “subject: stated he was: discharged fron. the Liquor
authority.’ ‘in “California under fals “charges Of:
cept ing bribes; - “Immediately theresfter; ‘he: ‘left for .
Mexico. ‘because | he was: disgusted, with the Imited States...
In August | or. ‘September, 1962’, -he-met @ man. fron Maryland in’::
: ‘Mexico: City who, ‘introduced ‘him’ to individuals: ‘whom he believed:
So maLy have ‘been: soviet agents ..: He. refused | ‘to:give descriptions 7
“name or: other. aetad le." When auestioned ¢ ‘on, specific Points



--- Page 128 ---
13-00000

| Suseet ‘elnimed he. haa the names of. au Americans:

4 used. tor but since be was” not “stupid ‘he thought ‘at:
a used to kill. someone: with. Subject: tore off the -
: $10, 00 -bill and- offered it -to*the- ‘interviewing
“to: be used aS identification in’ | contacting him when
: ; | He suggested.

oss ‘as pox 76121. Sanford "Station, ‘Los. Angeles, |.
; His. Sate of birth on “the license. is S August: 5.

‘on ‘April ‘19, “1963, “the ‘subject: contacted ‘the Los.
Angeles “California Off ice* of the FBI and furnished : the
following information to.a Special Agent. of. that. Office: .

OT.



--- Page 129 ---
EP. 65-951

165: “1962. ‘He. ‘said. that one of ‘the: tems ‘of: ‘this’.
as. that: he was, ‘to-have. *¥easonable. visitation*
with his two. ‘small a court ond “He said ‘that his wife

ALS: ‘this point ain “the interview, the subject. became.
and quite ‘rude, He- said. ‘that. the: Judge™ cannot orde
an. attorney © “if he:does not: want one and, to: do
lation af his: ‘civil: “rights. ‘He reved on. that
1. aware. of the, law: and demanded that’ the FB
the dudge 3 involved. . co me

He mentioned as he was leaving that
he not. get. Bh “job. in the near’ future, he ‘was going. to:
blo the: lid: of f"concerning. Los | Angeles Police Department, :
Angeles Sheriff's Office, Los Angeles County District. °
Attorne and the ‘California Alcoholic Beverage | Control I Board

: It is: noted that ‘subject at. ‘first. refused ‘to give -
. his: Jaddress.. ‘He then’ stated. that, he had- lived | in Mexico: City;,-
D. Fee, net, about. 3Q days ag0: He then gave. bis ‘Los Angeles. :

28. woe



--- Page 130 ---
13-00000

address” as rast OF. ice Box. x 75801, Sanford stations, Los “Angeles

On ‘September 23,
records. Veterans ‘Administration. “VAD. ‘Outpatient
1031, South Broadway»: Los: Angeles, al torn cee

‘Records ‘dadioate the following. service-connected
) NAGELL'S- records : Cote De

econs tructed: left. ear canal |
-Paresia (paralysis), partial, ‘Lett facial. herve
“Lagophthalmos’, - left. (defective hearing. bilateral):
‘Multiple sears, left forearn, left ‘buttocks right.
‘leg, cand right. knee
racheotouy- é : fo a
‘Fractures ight and left mandibles. (jam)
:Rrain ’ ‘concussion : a : fos ;
Right hyper tropia

coe

The abies imation’ can ‘be made’ ‘available only
upon the: issuance. / subpoena duces tecum: _ The identity: re)

roadway, Los: Angeles, Gaistoraia,



--- Page 131 ---
. Mr. "SHERID

en, “1963. by. “patrolmen wee
: “Department.” At. ‘that. tt

y estigative 2 earednet os of. ‘the FBI, “that. he.
Regie any statement, that. any statement ‘he.

NAGELL | requested: permission to. telephonically Oe
an attorney. in’ Los. “Angeles ,: California,’ at about |
This FeqUest was immediately granted, upon ..

‘INO. don" t. want: ‘to call that  shystor

that “he: had fired: two. shots - ‘in the- bank: "to ‘keep anyone. from
vin ryt He stated, that: he was an excelent shot,

and: .



--- Page 132 ---
. Ked or: his notive ‘in, attempting to: hold up
NAGELL: stated | that: he. was _mnapy, with the America
‘through: judicial |

He. advised ‘that he chad. been. ‘assigned Enlisted Army |
Officers ' Serial. Numbers: 02028346

‘orean, ‘campaign,. “and ‘he had received. “three: ‘purple
Continuing , he ‘advised: ‘that. he receiyed a battle .



--- Page 133 ---
13-00000

1, 1889, Assistant United States.

jeptenver al, 1963, WACHARD CASE NAGEL was

Texas ,. at. which hearing - the charges of bank: robbery filed!
‘age : him were, read to him ee the United States Commissioner

and ‘that ‘any statement. he: nade could be. used: against him mt
in a court: of. law, He was | also ‘advised that he had the ©.
rane ne consult. an attorney and. that. no. threats or. -promises



--- Page 134 ---
13-00000

“that: “when :he. entered. the State National
the: ‘afternoon of ‘September 20 ; £1963, othat:
rave taken : ‘any: money. He. said that ‘to. ‘the .

onsiderable dength of ‘time. in: ‘the hospital. He. advised



--- Page 135 ---
he was.
he was

r 1¢ Veterans" ‘Hospital, Brentwood , “Los Angeles,
fornia: however, he was not granted” ‘admission. and ‘he:
Ated that to the. ‘best. of his. recollection he made : this
equest in. May. or. June ‘of, 1963. ° He pointed out: that’; |

; is; medical records could ‘pe: obtained. at the ‘Veterans ,
Administ: ation 1 Regional, Office, 1380" South. Sepulveda aus

Ta ‘this ‘connection; |
wand | “that. he. had resigned | his. “conmission |

He said that. he’ ‘had. ‘not. ‘worked - since ‘then: ‘and. actually
“not able to do, any. sind of ‘work because of: the: -time--he |
, He stated that: the only. Jeb that’ he



--- Page 136 ---
13-00000

3 but | that. “he ‘was “out. ‘of these vette
‘they | were. He ‘réquested: an aspirin, :
r him.” In response ‘to a question as. to

7 photostat showed. he had been. honorably discharged. fron ‘the.
Army: t ‘Fort: Dixy: ‘New Jersey, Octoper, 1959,, with the rank :
‘of. C ptain.. . ‘ 7 oo oe wer .

“Other military | papers ‘found’ in \NAGELL' s suitcase.
“shoved | e had been awarded the Purple | Heart ‘three: times or”



--- Page 137 ---
13-00000

meals since
je prisoner :

“After. he was tu oo wa tot aye ope ;
: jailers. were, 1s

The: ‘september 26, 1963, issue’ of the El Paso Times °.
n° article on ‘page THA. entitled. “NAGELL To Take:
Sovebaa) to the’ article, “Former

motion of. Assistant RU Vs District. ora) ame MORTON, - who

‘ d'an order authorizing the check few from: G. Ss. Distric!
Judge, } ee THOMASON . .



--- Page 138 ---
13-00000

with: “RICHARD “CASE. NAGELL, the ‘A41st- cic, during - the
of 1958 fron. approximately February. to May,” :

lventitled. “joldug- Snapect..
F. “According to, the: article,” “RitfARD CASE
BAGEL “charged. in: Us. S.:District: Court with an attempt. to |
“hold ‘up.the. State National’ ‘Bank -told . the. Court, today he ‘did.
“Dot: attempt ft “hole “up the. ‘bank. : .



--- Page 139 ---
13-00000

‘EP’ 65-951 3

: _NAGELL ‘bad refus d to

con hevember on 108

‘the subject: i iled a. wit.

te FT on int

ages
2 “EL Paso, Texas,

a Richard Case’ Nagel, do hereby make the. following,



--- Page 140 ---
vipea: the court null ee
ertaining: to: ‘ tm



--- Page 141 ---
aur ra do not..so. elect To he coerced to do. so, vis.
Th: of imy- rights unde Amendment. 3 of the Constitutie

FREDERICK - ae WORTON, 1 El Paso, advised that there is. no’ o validity
.. to: subject’ Ss. ‘allegation inasmuch as Title 18, Section 4244,
Ben Ss. > Code,. states. ‘that upon a motion. Py. ‘the: United States °



--- Page 142 ---


--- Page 143 ---
13-00000

waeeuaer 3,1964,. “GEORGE NORMAN: “STANGA was
ontacted and Anterviewsd: at the El. Paso County- dail after.

requested: ‘that. he be “interviewed: regarding ‘RICHARD CASE
t. the. time: of “thé interview, NAGELL was. incar~
cerated. at°the El. Paso County Jail as. 3 Federal ‘prisoner
- for: the crime of bank: robbery.



--- Page 144 ---
d, and" after. “making several’ scenes with his wife,
by® court. order. ‘fron. seeing his. children. | During

a Communist country. in’ Europe. In: Aine with
eave the United States, ‘NAGELL ‘made a ‘cont

‘or contact man’ for ‘the. ‘Party. in: El. Paso, Texas
an. Was - allegedly ‘to -have (a visa, ‘and: “passport. for
$0 ‘that: he might ‘leave the :Un
in. (Geechoslovakia’ NAGEL then left the ‘Los Angeles :
: He told “STANGA. that. durin

slong. After. atriving: in EL ‘Paso, ‘Texas, NAGELL: said
‘Zot. a hotel room and: again attempted ‘Suicide with.



--- Page 145 ---
13-00000



--- Page 146 ---
13-00000



--- Page 147 ---
13-00000

n January ‘15; 1964, Mrs. _- FRANCES NAGELL, 856° ‘south:
Angeles, California, telephonically advised od

juries, he. underwent .

States “At tcmmey ‘FREDERICK. Jd. “MORTON filed
i State: .S. District Court, Mnder: ‘Section 4244,



--- Page 148 ---
13-00000



--- Page 149 ---
13-00000

ibassy- ‘addresses’ “and: names,” “and the. addresses.
paris other ‘people, and ‘organizations, including | the,
“Angeles” address | ‘of. the. "Fair Play. for Cuba Committee."

; posedty recently received ae 1963 | Information P

in sland, New York, HA 6-6830 , “a trunk in
: B Bas mask is: contained. tn the salve box of

S of various ‘Communist Party members , agents, courier
ctivities, “eo te Ga A ‘man. by the: name, ‘of. ‘FRED SOHN BENIO)

ly knows, ‘nothing ‘of the. contents and ‘4
: NAGEL’, recent hy. wrote a letter to “this
UMr.

alue. ur’ ‘MORTON’ s. ‘confidential source® “told: “him -
prior. contacts with. the FBE ‘were. not revealing

al knew of: him.



--- Page 150 ---
‘the su heck: advised Special;
“of. the FBT that “"for. the record":
‘Say ‘that his association with LEE HARVEY -
social and “that he: had. nét: OSWALD. in.
NAGEDL - refused to” comment further .

} ‘the subjéct’ ‘adv sed. a  Secre: .
q “and: = % Special ‘Agent: of :. ‘the. FBU- in’ “EL. “Paso joes
that” chad ‘heen’ ‘acquainted with MARINA; he
£ HARVEY OSWALD. “Subject. further. pointed. ‘out’ ‘that :
aR having: marital difticulties with, MARINA. ‘The

to. a “request ‘made by this. subject: to: be inte

‘ \ uThe Secret ‘Service Agent was

od oO ‘NAGELL, and. he attempted ‘to interview NAGEL
Ey NAGEL. stated | that the. Anformation | he. originally.

On + January” 23, “1964, ‘an “agent of. ‘the ‘United ‘States’
# ervice; BL Paso,” Texas, advised that an. Agent ‘of
: chad

ig pupae 18, "1964, “This photo
taken ‘ot ‘the subject: on" September | 2h. 1963 at. the.

Pag
AS PAs FE. bee a



--- Page 151 ---
13-00000

eae was ‘advised ‘of. the.
“and: She: stated that she aie

The fo lowing: desriptive ‘information. regardin
ASE: /NAGELL, was obtained sheet interviews: with

as. ‘Toe "ceatier Joe Krai er,
Joe Krane : Robert cr -Nolan
white. k :
Male:
_ ‘American:

August 5, 1930, “Greenwich, “New ‘Yor

6 tg an o

= 180. ‘pounds’

22>: Medium : ;
~  Reddish- -brovn

. Brown, =

Left. eye slants downward toward |

~ outside; 2": vertical ‘scar ‘in front
“of left ‘ear; half circle. shape
_< scar commencing in left eyebrow

“and extending down ‘to cheek

“50.


--- Page 152 ---
LOUIS NAGELL, _born- Norway
deceased; - FRANCES : KAUFMAN
NAGELL, born: United States.
856 South. Catalina, ‘Los “An
California. (January 15; 1964)
resided 22. First Street, ‘Troy,
vew York as: of. August: 5,71948
LOULS NAGELL, Syracuse, ‘Ne

(as of ‘August 23, 1950). °
‘Mrs. .ELEAXORE GAMBERT ,. 82-:

New. York (as of August ° 235.1 c
ELEANORE * “HOPPER, 8222 Ankene
‘Avenue,. Elmhurst , ‘Long’ Island
New: York: (as: of*. February. 19, 1951
“HOBART. KAUFMAN , ‘Delaware Avenui
‘Albany,’ New York Gs “of August
1948).
» Box. 75801, | Sanford Station

104-24-8340 a
“RA, 12115891 ‘(Enlisted)
2 02 ‘028 346. (Officer):
01.438. 346 (Officer):
“Record: :Augus t S5°:1948, Privat
‘as Captain, October “29
: io : ort. Dix, New Jersey’. 5
Ser ce Decorations :bronze Star} ‘Purple Heart.
clusters) |

MITSUKO ‘TAKAHASHE, por

Divorced wife

: 1958 ,. United States. Consulate,
- Tokyo, Japan, residence .533A,,

"B" Street, Fort Dix, New Jorsey
‘(as.of February. 30, 1959) 5.
~ Apartment 12, 440 South: Union.
“uc Street, Los. Angeles,. California®
(as of July: 30,. 1962 while separated)



--- Page 153 ---
“Divorced, “wife

Re: idences since.

ite, granted ‘dnterlocitery.
ivorce;,, November..19,°.1962,
Superior court’, of. Los: Angele:
“County, : California; :
. Union, Los “Angel s
California ‘(as “of: December 15;

‘TERESA -DOLORES. NAGELL, ‘born
‘June 28, 1959,,. Fort: Dix,
‘New. Jersey ~ :

ROBERT ‘ LAMONT WAGELL, 1 born:

November: 20,. 1960, Los ‘Angeles

Calitornia.”

‘Hackett: “Junior. High: ‘and

lbany. High’ ‘School ;. “ALB: ays

“New ‘York, ‘graduated. 1948,
“two! years | of colle e while’ i

service:

‘NewYork: central R Load,”
‘July, 1948,. “to Auguis
“Albany, ‘New: York 5":

December :14,. - 1959: ‘to ‘June. 8,
State: Reverage Dapa, ment,

‘Route: 1;

December, “1941. to seein 48°,
140 New Scotland Avenue

“Albany, New York;
duly, : 1948. to™ “Aug t,. 1948,

304 Madison Avenue, Albany,

~ New. York; ©
|, 8222. Ankener ‘Avenue, Elihurst,
“Long Island, New. York (as ‘of. :
August. 1, ~1951);° : :
‘1LS33A. oBH ‘Street, Fort: Dix,’
New: Jersey: (as of December , 1959
- P.O. ' Box 76121, Sanford, Station

Los’ Angeles, California. as’ of

-1960.‘and: as: of August 20; 1962) ;



--- Page 154 ---
13-00000 _

‘Residen 1S

: 9... Aol
/ -California | (as,
‘July’ -and Septenber, 1962);
Mexico City De F..,. Mexico
“(subject ‘Claimed ‘this resid
‘from: August; 1962 . to Octobe
1962. Ona: ‘subsequent occasi

claimed ‘this residence: dur
‘period: subsequent, ‘to ‘June
.1962,. and! “prior | to ‘Decembe
‘8225 Grand: Avenue,” Elmbu:
Queens, Long. Tsland, “New. Y
(as. of: November “15, “1962,
goin-on. ‘December °7,. 1962)

‘Holiday ‘Inn, dacksonville,
ope of tecenber 15,

oa: Angeles, ‘

- Fuly26,°1963);
375L 6th. Street,
California’ {no date gi

28308. West Boulevard ;
“Qi tornia, ee date. Ly



--- Page 155 ---
13-00000

Bank: Account

- Automobile

“Albany 3B.
' 1950) oe : .
2 1957 Ford: hardtop. black: afk
“white, “bearing Californ
“ licens

- January 24, 1963, in M ami., Florida),
BA - ve SO So Sat

751 6th “Btreét; Lo!
alifornia (appeared |

ores York (august

MYU 890 ‘Cin. pos:
of. this automobile whe “interviewed. .



--- Page 156 ---
13-00000

a den tification nimber :
“CTLT138540, ° “registered ‘to
‘RICHARD Ce NAGELL , Rox. 76121

in Tecember,
. 1963. 7 1963

— 20; 1963)

NGERPRINTS

Richard Cy
Nagel) =

Richard. Case
Nagell..
ala 616 479. N

Sect “#2313

9-21-63
wees . bank. rob”

Vpaohaca Case
. Nagell |:
| #2248-A —



--- Page 157 ---
13-00000

: ‘This: document ‘contains neither ‘eecommendations | ‘nor. |.
coneLusions, of. the: FBI. : ‘It:ig: the, ‘proj erty of the. FBI and ‘is*
eaned . to your. agency; it: and ‘its contents are not. to be. ‘distributed ;



--- Page 158 ---


--- Page 159 ---
D ) HAS sa 3 W. AND our OF: simin OFFiGES. a ‘Past

SURRENT: AGENCY DIRECTOR iY. LISTS, ry SOW ‘sos IS) POSSIBI, nares TH

Pann

: watcw OFFICE.


--- Page 160 ---
13-00000

grrona om no 10 “ (oy a
5010-104 fo

: UNITED STATES: “GOVERNMENT a

Me emorandian
_ 10 os Mr. R. J. Leonard - PATE! 26 March 1964

“FROM. -: Chief, Research b Byanch/SR5 at

suBject: NAGELL, Richard Case

_ ‘le Attached isa | copy of a 2 October 1962 memorandum from_
: the FBI in regard to ‘Richard Case. NAGELL.

om . 2 SA Alexander Ww. NEALE, Jr. of the Washington Field

7 Office, FBI, has informally advised ‘the undersigned that NAGELL has

‘been ‘arrested on the West Coast for bank robbery, is going to be. :

tried-in. the near futute forthe alleged crime, : cand that NAGELL had in
is } possession the following information: .

_ ‘Richard FECTEAU.
(Lynn, Mass) - : : te .
DAC: (CIA) on ere

CIA.
Mr. S.. PARKER |
“ Mrs, GUTHRIES. :
Mr. C, CHURCHILL,  purn GIN
~ Mr. J. DAVANON = Heer
_ Mr. J, SLOSS gant a a
Mr. E. LEIBACHER Te ws

3.) A check of so Indices has revealed no record of NAGELL, and
an.RI chéck only ‘disclosed. the attached FBI report, Please ‘recheck sO:
Indices ‘on the subject, . have a file set up on an expedite basis, : and on an”
xpedite. basis identify the above individuals as to whether any have any ©
connection with this. Agency. - The above Richard FECTEAU may be
identical to: the individual who was captured by the Chinese Communists
and. is how in prison, | °

eT oe “Also check with Mrs. THORN of oo/c to .determine whether
: oojc has any record’of NAGELL, It is believed that very possibly some



--- Page 161 ---
13-00000

-2-
of the above individuals may be connected with the Los Angeles or San

Francisco Field Office of OO/C, but at the present moment limit the
check with Mrs. THORN to determine ‘if they have any record of

Richard Case NAGELL.

4

BLS; jrg

Am ee Gg



--- Page 162 ---
13-00000

(When: Filled In)

NAME OF SUBJECT 5.

KEY TO ANALYSIS SYMBOLS*
= NOT IDENTICAL

eX = IDENTICAL - NOT DEROGATORY

U-ND=UNABLE TO IDENTIFY-NOT DEROGATORY

SA = SEE ATTACHED MEMORANDUM

[Teter cite or eres [Pfs sneer en oe
[sees SESS Ge no no ree) | [sane wet ens

RESULTS

0. | NAME - LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE “(Type or print) * SOURCE: DOCUMENT -
; — COVERT

an £/ “aetes
Wass

MMM

ANALYS IS* OR CHARGEOUT

UMM lid —__|. a YW
| Fite No. | Tye

FILE NO

\

CoCo
\
\
| Cee cee

i a :

| Tne

H)DWd”}./ .:,:.:ec—-cMM¢Jt RESULTS CONTINUED ON REVERSE SIDE YY YI]

REQUESTER: (Name. - Component - Extension)

teen 745 5450 T5340 ane 1735 INDICES SEARCH REQUEST

WHICH ARE OBSOLETE.


--- Page 163 ---
13-00000



--- Page 164 ---
“FEDERAL BUREAU. OF INVESTIGATION.

Copy tons eo

DAVID J » RELD-

- Office: it ia

Lo Report . J
Date: bruary 4, 1964 pe oe -
*.. Field Office’ j 2 EP 65- 951. a 7 / - _ Bureau File No. |
Omer ' RICHARD CASE: NAGELL as
; : e
“Character ESP{ONAGE = X
se a a : TOTAL, DENIAL”
_ Synopsis: Rackground “Subject ‘entered W:. Se Army 8/5/48 and |
. honorably di Scharged. as Captain. 10/29/59, Received ‘many:
comprign . awards ‘during Korean* ‘conflict Sele survivor

- airplane crash: 11/28/54. suffered faci 1 disfigurement Po
; and: g3 en ‘psychiatric: examinat): on. Su pect claimed he’ was .
released from employment by :State: Beverage Department.
Los Angeles, California, 6. 8/82, having been accused of.
taking 520,000 bribe.:> Subject refused furnish police details:
‘of (his. shooting by) unidentified assailant on 7/16/62 and. :
subsequent ky failed: Civil Rights ‘complaint against ‘police...
Tn September ,' - 1962. subject: advised. U.S. briba : Wexico”

City, he had. been. ipproached for. recruiting in ¥ <ico City
refused to elaborate; did not ai :ire to return to uw. Sey

“o “bitter, ‘disgusted, disillusionce and disaffocted. Sada: if
he did go-to some. other. country .it- “would ‘cost. U. . - millions <.
wa, “through. being a good: citizen" and thought ‘he. ms gotten ~
a.."dirty-deal all-around. _ Advised FRE in New vo a City one)

: 41/16/62 he wanted ° to “expose Department ot. Atcohosric SAVEPEE EO
“Control ‘in: California. | Advised. FBI-in dacksonvilié. Fla.’ on)

° 12/15/62. he had been approached shortly. before in Washington,
“D. €., 5 individual believed to be working for Soviets; oe

id he believed: he-~
's, condition »
1963,

eh Doe



--- Page 165 ---
Cuban or Russian Sources “Rave, hi
id he. bé ‘permitved to return
‘could be. ofcturther ‘uy :
constantiv under 's c
on. 4719763: he: had take

en: o.
same date. in violation
las hed wrist night of. 9720/63,
treatment. highly. ‘emotions
ot crying. stated unable: to prt
from U: v Army. ‘Cell mate Said
member: Conn . P, :
decided. everythin,

Tansee

Nis gourd pa

‘enter {or Federal Prisoners. Spi ing? ield;
, : 124/64 by USHC, “El Paso. tor. 30-day. ‘period ‘to:
undergo psychiatric ¢ ‘examination.

ma piatol: cand microfilm.
5ame to his’ contact BO. he.
Government ..: Claimed. to! ‘be.

Sion, tearful. nervous ,
‘Cow to 56 RY kids.

Bank,

ational

“gee tion 2133, Title 18, USC;

felt he nerded psychiatric’.

when: ‘interviewed | “given to spells .

‘on Peet since, dysc harge :
sub. 1

“sup oie “O mee qd.

Alleged Connection pith.

i
i
i
T
!



--- Page 166 ---
rial: would: not. take place uptal December

cthat | the, ‘actual os
21962, _and

i.
|
t

. 1962. the Subject. advised “Specia? |
of. . - ine Facksonville, Florida, that he nad.
sa captain ‘in ‘the U.S CAtay and: bad heen involved
’ Ligence: investigatiors for the. eae ‘for. approxrmate
‘ Hew aid: he Berved: in Japan for most. of his” 7
C Tapanese eoman damned METSEK: NAGELL
. ite adv is,

\

“Scrence ae
“this: persor “was? 3 hombor,
Sa raghtisy.. ofpanization
‘the United States ¢-place
o the safety. of ithe internal
“Baia an either: 1958: pr ~1959
letter ‘KO! ithe: FRE in, Wa Shing ton’, _
cerning FUATSARC:
orably from the. » S. Army on.
tly. became employed on Decemba: “14
tein’ Los. Angeles .. ono

an anonynous |



--- Page 167 ---
videntify the ‘individual who invited him'to the reception.

- Florida, to a bar and wear a red sweater, where he would =.

iS RATA wsteag

EP 65-951.

“NAGELL advised that he went to Washington, D. C..
gna tre he resided “until recently. He stated while in - :
. Washington. D. Gs he had been approached: by an individual
whom he feit. was. either a Special Agent of the FBI or a : :
Soviet. Espionage Agent.’ He said he met this’ person in a GAR vINS. ;
bar in’ Washington C., located at 11. aoe Street NW,.. eR
Washington. Des 8 aid this person ed of Domestic
“intelligence. and - als alked: of. giving him an intelligence.
‘ assignment. He Said’ the more: “he ‘thought. this matter. over.
he was positive. that’ this. individual works for the Soviets.

. - He. sais ‘that ‘in September, 1962, he. was invited .
Le t0 attend a: reception at the Russian Embassy . He: could: not...

‘He advis sed: that. he contacted: the Central tntelligence Agency.
“cae either, Langley, Virginia.. or Elwood. Virginia, | and used...
the nane of FOE CRANER or KRAMER during this.contact: with.
GUA. Reo “Bad he told them of. e above information” and |
wanted: ‘Ome adv: yas to ‘whether. ‘to go through with such.
ADS assignment. He’ said: he was. to meet this individual. who.
was to give: him the assignment at, the above-mentioned bar. -°
‘on 34th Street, “and. ‘in order to be recognized, he was. to
place tpree: nickels on the’ bar ‘in line with a dime Placed ©
directly over . the middle™ nickel. ‘He said the CLA told: him
—abat since this matter involved domestic Yather than’ foreign -
inteLligence. | he ‘should refer this information ‘to. the’ FBY..

He Stated he ‘went: to . the above bar and’ there ‘was.
-contacted ‘by the same person and was told. to go. to. Mi amis

' be contacted’ relative, toan assignment. coe . rr

It. ia ‘to ‘be. noted that. during. the ‘entire interview
. with NAGELL, he was noted to ‘be din. an inebriated. condition
and was... very. vague in answering: questions. He was unable. to_
identify by name. any of the. individuals he discussed: and was.
also. unable to furnish a physical ‘description of © any, of. these |
»ndividuals. | In -addition® to being slightly inebriated he!

. also.gave the impression: ‘to the interviewing agents of | r being |
mentally “unbalanced. -



--- Page 168 ---
> assignuent. given. him, ‘other than that. he’ vas ‘to go ‘to
" Miwm- and” Sit. in a. bar which he is unable to identify and:

_ He furnished a ‘photograph of. hims Belfi.

'@ tion:

Grp 65-951

SMD “NAGEL ed. ‘he ‘is presently residing at. ‘the

Holiday ‘Inn, - ‘Jack onville, Florida, and would be there for © -
the next few days..:He Said. he is presently driving a 1959 °° |
Ford ‘which bears lifornia “license MYU 890.° He said, he has. ¢
no: Living: ‘rela iv xcept his former wife, who. resides at.

-440 South ‘Union ‘Los Angeles, California, and: his-.
sister, ELEANORE GAMBERT.,. 8225 Grand Avenue, Elmhurst,

‘New York... Ba ae

L ea: ‘that. he believes ‘in connection
he- is: actually: working for the.

Soviets “He ‘could. SUrnish'no information as to a specific

wait. ‘to, be contacted by. a Soviet Agent. He said he spoke |
Japanese and. Russian. ft usntly and 15 ‘well versed in. the:
Spanish language, ~ ‘He’ Said ‘he: was shot in June, 1962,

but refused to ‘discuss: any of the incidents surrounding the.
shooting ~ ‘He said bis auto has several bullet holes. in it.

1962. etforts were made. to locate.
Lait was determined: that. he-

. Bay. Pines, ‘Plorida; fron. December. 20,. 1962, to- Jaauary 22 .
‘1963... One. clinical ‘record _ contained ‘the following. informa=. eae

MINTER SUMMARY, “(ANTERSERVICE)

HISTORY - OF PRESENT. TLLNESS | ‘This 32 year old white. male
‘veteran @ Korean. ‘War was. admitted to Ward As 5-S- on 12-20-62 -


--- Page 169 ---
UNITED SPATES DEPART

FEDERAL BUghal oF INVE

Ta Replss Pewee Rei , . Ya \ MWASHENG TS DB Ge
File Ne. - co . . 24 “teste hace “. 1S Lo. ;
a : Toe eabcee? Xa oy oI -
REVIEWED 3Y FBVIFK T “FORCE |
(2/4 Ar foe

\ (J RELEASE IN PART.

‘yoldtden eb the Maatieat Gabuamy, Hemioo Cee, on
tember 25, 1962, end volumiaued the £ ing data
iimaat bo :

® addvess for himself in Beutiac ty, no gbated

OG ATOLOS Poed



--- Page 170 ---
7 | Be montdoned that on July 15, 1962, “while eee
waking mech” between Malibu end Gunerd, he hed boom ght
an the chad. Ta connection with this letter incdsemt, ee


--- Page 171 ---
13-00000

nh 4 Rania ross

Be sbuted that he thought he had bean appiuechad
heve in Bexico. city far reemuiting, gat eben L ARBOG

. specatleally in th regard. pefused to state oy whem op

. tae web ce un pehale of what omuey. He stabed that

; gue job af. thig sart would be da ty Xork. He volisstaaned.

many wosds thet

saying ead be used against han an

cubion.- He stated that he bei

definite; that ne would ienve lid

net go back t the

not care te retin to the Unite

eo Lar he: ct Ge

Ne oteted that he was co

he keer the

Gm thing. he gaia, that

e

ry £0 Sane ts a
coe Re: be Was be: ;

aitisen” “and thought he hast gotten @ ay dead around,”

| He wae told to ge te the Protection Section in

regerd to 88 on American citizen.

Re stated that ie had been to the Probection On ani

Wald net go thee aul that the way he was

weld nok go back te ted States. He seid that

RE RS Soe Rea ai thet his



--- Page 172 ---
13-00000

‘ghated thas oe im
28 Momh boomine of
itice turing which

4 E oabihity 3
in Give Eoxvmust

in sage gomebics 2 rN
tatouesta hea si
eit the Est
sdetrb PSENT Eg

"= as

“but. adden,
chopphag Bbor

paver
~ . Eretant



--- Page 173 ---
- 2 38250.00 wounis =. -
; ‘Cisabi tity Pt


--- Page 174 ---
13-00000

Zoe, A Fara be, wected te
ond also esked what section a


--- Page 175 ---
Tee °F pequast: that ‘petirenent conteibubsons:
: and reinbursament. for: usused leave be. Sorvamiad -:
. bone, © She: below Ttsted ‘address as soon ao :
- eagteiea). :



--- Page 176 ---
13-00000

| ) Dend SS sabes tk Re Ro b a ste
| ous - Bw Fics Wot tte 4ega3 gh”
. - Boar a £4 ony bd, Re Reb. @ Mace et oe i

Be Fee ot bee A 9a3 VERS

E

8867 THN 36mm



--- Page 177 ---
13-00000

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE |
FEDERAL BUREAU. OF INVESTIGATION:

Los. Angeles, ‘California
_ June 12, 1964 -

In Reply, Please Refer to
Fila No, as as.

-mitte - = RICHARD CASE NAGELL

Character “ ESPIONAGE - X oo
rr ae

a Reference’ "| Report.of.SA JAMES: H}HOOSE; JR.,-

; "dated as above at Los Angeles,” -

- California. on

: ! may sources (exéept ary listed below) whose identities
are concealed. An. réferenced ‘communication have furnished reliable

o a
a a
a {
Poo,
sa ra
¢ e
i ai
¢
b

“This document contains neither recommendations. nor conclusions of the FBI. It is the property
. of the FBI and is loaned to your agency; it-and ite contents are not to be distributed outside '

| poh Whsip


--- Page 178 ---
aa . . - Y oe . mo i Sey fo — oo
“poselansom a PSSA
UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE oo
‘FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION |

* Copy to:

| | Reon yy ile HOOSE, oR, 7 - ; . one : Los Angeles, california no.
- : Fld Oe Fl Now 65~7445 - Butea File Now 68933
=O RICHARD CASE NAGELL . abe AY MIYGPK TASK FORCE |
aol 146537 : “Safed oe

— ‘Character ESPIONAGE - XxX . () ELEASE iN Pat

:.. Synopsis: Mother, brother, former wife, end friend of RICHARD
: NAGELL all consider him to be mentally disturbed. _
No indication NAGELL involved in espionage, Communist. .
Party, or "Fair Play for Cuba Committee" activity. —
NAGELL told his brother he had been to Cuba and once
jokingly told his former wife he was thinking of going
to Russia. Information concerning NAGELL's bank
accounts. set forth. _ SUBJECT HAS ATTEUETED SUICIDE.

RU
DETAILS: we

Mrs. MITSUKO NAGELL, nee
Mitsuko Takahashi, aka
Mrs. Richard C. Nagell

{divorced from RICHARD C.: NAGELL)

On February 3, 1964, Mrs, TsUKO NAGELL furnished © a
the following information to SAs JAMES H, HOOSE, JR., and JOSEPH”
DOYLE POWELL at her residence at 440 South Union Avenue, :
Apartment 12, Los Angeles, California:

‘She filed for divorce from. RICHARD NAGELL in Los
Angeles on April 19, 1962, but: has not received the final -
decrees, NAGELL, stayed out late nights, beat her, never gave

_ This document contatne neither recommendations nor conclusions of the FBI. It is the property of the FBI and {e:loaned to your agency; It and

its contents are not to be distributed outside your agency,


--- Page 179 ---
13-00000

her any money,- and did not. like. the children, She believes
- NAGELL's mother resides in the Los Angeles area, but she’ ~

, political interest, never mentioned communism or the oy ear

- said he was thinking of going ‘to Russia, but Mrs. NAGELL is. se
certain this, was. said in jest. - .

mentally wrong with NAGELL, He would fly into violent rages os,
without apparent reason, She ‘pointed out that her television
-: pet has a split plastic case and stated NAGELL hit the set“

_ with his fist once while angry and this resulted in this
: damage. .

the marriage, he has frequently complained about not being :
. with them since the divorce, He sends them cards. from various -
» places in the United States, but has never since the divorce oe
'.. furnished support for the children or Mrs, NAGELL, As ac cone

“sequence,” Mrs, NAGELL “has beén supporting herself and the oo

children through. employment asa Waitress and has to. board | et
the children out. —_

-that she never knew NAGELL to be involved in espionage in any-

-elal. difficulty during their residence in the ini bed ‘States,

-.- During the marriage NAGELL had a bank account at the Bank of .
- “America, Wilshire and Vermont, Los Angeles, but Mrs, NAGELL -
“* doubts there was ever much money in the account. She said

. that since the separation in April of 1962, NAGELL has sent

; sngeles office of the FBI identifiable with Mrs. | MITSUKO NAGELL,

WON

LA 65-THHS a

does not know the mother's address and has never met her, bo

She repeatedly asked NAGELL to introduce her to his mother, ...

but he always refused to do so, ; / 7
Mrs, NAGELL stated NAGELL never exhibited any

Play for Cuba Committee," or Cuba, Once in the summer of
1963 NAGELL was mad about something unrecalled and jokingly

Mes. ‘NAGELL ts of the. ‘opinion there 1s something --

Although. NAGELL ata not like his children, during .

On March 6, 1964, Mrs. NAGELL stated to SA HOOSE
manner, She further commented that they were always in finan-  _ :

her a total of about $180. 00.
There is no information in the files of the Los


--- Page 180 ---
13-00000 _

TA 6575

“> Mes, FRANCES M, NAGELL,
-nee Frances Kaufman:

_ {nother of RICHARD C. NAGELL)

the following information to SAs JAMES H, HOOSE, JR., and
\.. PHILIP J, REILLY at her residence at 856 South Catalina
Avenue, Apartment 104, Los Angeles:

re Mrs, NAGELL’ stated that for many ‘years and: for

i: varLlous reasons, none of which relate to this case, there

_has been dissension in the family, However, until the time
.. that RICHARD NAGELL was in the airplane crash, | they had gotten.
glong: well together... Since the crash ‘there has been a marked:

“y Some form of mental trouble.

., 7 “She: ‘Saw RICHARD in Chicago, Tuinots, in 1954, and .
nee she moved to Los Angeles in May of 1955. It was then seven

“- years before she heard directly from him or. saw him. She ran

- into RICHARD by chance on the street in Los Angeles, saw that -

financial assistance, .

Mrs. NAGELL gave her’ son - $1,000. 00 on one occasion.
“money, ‘ She does not: know" if he had a bank account or: P note a

_ Mrs. NAGELL was trying to locate RICHARD after he
: had disappeared for several days. . She knew he could often
‘be found at The Happy Rabbit, a beer: ‘joint at 2709 West Sixth
‘Street, Los Angeles, She went there and found. RICHARD, -and

“- this bar, claiming it was no place for a decent woman. .
"Mes, NAGELL stated it was really not that bad a place, She
.. became. definitely convinced after this incident that there

was something serlously “wrong with her son. But even prior .
“*. to this time she observed RICHARD became extremely angry over
os nothings’ ¢ and he would cry without explaining what was troubling

On March 5, 1964, Mrs, FRANCES NAGELL furnished — ye

- ‘change in RICHARD NAGELL, and Mrs. NAGELL is. certain her son has — -

he needed help, . and: thereatter ‘tried to give him both moral and - -

; and 1 much smaller amoumts on other occasions, He never ‘expressed oa |.
appreciation for this help. RICHARD never seemed to have enough ee a

ta

he flew into an uncontrollable rage because she had gone inside


--- Page 181 ---
13-00000

-)- would have nothing. to do'with her. She kept track of him...
“-. through her. other son, LOUIS, who is a year and a half older.
. than RICHARD, Mrs. NAGELL was in a way happy to have the :

‘She thought since both sons had serious problems, they might ;
that he was never able to straighten out RICHARD
never mentioried Cuba or the "Fair Play for Cuba Committee" -

‘or gave any indication he was in any manner involved inv
a espionage. Les

- ‘that she. wanted to point out: that RICHARD had never. physically > ..3
-" abused her, that the abuse was always vocal, She also mentLoned no

years, and she dogs ‘not think her problem. has yet been .
woe eliminated,
“> Angeles Office of the FBI identifiable: with: Mes. FRANCES * os, ;

LOUIS KAUFMAN, true name
.. LOUIS NAGELL (brother of. _—
"RICHARD ¢. NAGELL) Ss

~ following information to SAs JAMES H, HOOSE, JR., and PHILIP.
'd, REILLY at his residence at 20130 ‘Samoa Avenue, Tujunga, .
California, telephone 353-1224:

"has had little contact; with other family members until the last . : eT
‘same army outfit.as his brother, RICHARD, and looked him up. .. -

= with LOUIS, However, when their mother. told RICHARD that LOUIS’

LA 65-7445

‘After above mentioned incident, RICHARD again

boys get together after years of estrangement. She
described: LOUIS as being an almost hopeless alcoholic,
be able to help each other, LOUIS has told her, however,

She stated that RICHARD never ‘discussed communism, :

On March 9, 196), Mrs, NAGELL ‘anformed SA HOOSE

that she herself has been under. psychiatric care for ‘several .

There is no information in the files of the Los

* On March 55° 1964, LOUIS KAUFMAN furnished the oe

LOUIS stated he got in trouble at age 16 and since aean
that. time has used his mother's maiden name (28 his ‘last name, 2. .
He considers himself to be the "black sheep" of the family and

year or two, At one time in Korea he. discovered he was in the

RICHARD was an officer in intelligence while LOUIS was an
enlisted man, and RICHARD did not want to have much contact


--- Page 182 ---
LA 65-7445

|
af

|. 0 had cancer of the throat in 1962, RICHARD went to LOUIS and

[3 offered to help him, LOUIS later discoveréd he did not have:

asco. ganeer and also discovered that RICHARD was the one who needed
help. LOUIS frequently saw RICHARD in 1962 and until about
August of 1963: when RICHARD left the Los Angeles area. ;

a LOUIS considers RICHARD to be mentally. disturbed.
He recalled an afternoon. when both were at The Happy Rabbit

_ and the. newspapers carried an account of the burglary of the
_ local armory. © RICHARD told LOUIS he had pulled the burglary

' and had some machine guns in his car ‘parked on the street

“i near the. beer Joint. LOUIS immediately said he would like

to see the machine guns and the two of them welked out to the a
i Catt... “LOUIS.. saw: no. guns. and. upon asking. RICHARD..where: they.were . <i." }
‘the latter replied he did not know what LOUIS was talking about,
'.. RICHARD said he had no recollection of telling LOUIS anything
- about guns or burglarizing any armory. In addition to this -
‘LOUIS said that RICHARD was usually in a state of deep ;
:. depression, RICHARD complained about his wife divorcing him
oe and about his employment problems. Do

woe . “RICHARD never spoke in favor of ‘communism but he
; aia say that he thought the American government should do
more for him in view of his army service, He never mentioned -
-., Russia, When RICHARD returned from Mexico City in 1962, he.
.- told LOUIS he had gone to Cuba from México, He gave no. Leet
-  peason for having made this trip, LOUIS has no information ;
'." indieating RICHARD was ever involved in espionage. He- never...
- heard RICHARD mention the “Fair Play for Cuba. Committee,"

: ‘LOUIS. does not lnow, ar RICHARD had a bank account; —
he does Jmow :RICHARD usually ‘was broke.

e SS 7 -o- There is. no information. in the files of the Los
i
1
|
|

7 ne Angeles “Office of the FBI identifiable with Louis KAUFMAN,

" FREDERICK HOWARD JOHN

' (friend of RICHARD c. NAGELL)

a " FRED JOHN furnished the following ‘information to
ee SA JANES. He HOOSE, OR., on March % 1964+

ge[- T4537


--- Page 183 ---
13-00000

LA 65~7445 —
. JOHN resides in a boarding house at 817 South’

"Catalina Avenue, Los Angeles. He is employed by the Hartford. nee
Insurance Company, 548 South Spring Street, Los Angeles, :

ot He has known RICHARD NAGELL for about one year.
'-- He met him through BILL LYNN of the California Alcoholic
. Beverage Controll at The Happy. Rabbit. JOHN does not know eh Ee
“". any members of NAGELL's: family t nor does he lmow of any other gs
_ close friends of NAGELL, » ;

; .. NAGELL Left Los Angeles the ‘first or second weelt of:
a September, 1962, . Just before léaving he told JOHN he would. :

“be traveling. and ‘asked him to share his Post Office box so.
he could.forward.on. the. government: disability checks ‘which: . yess
., he receives monthly. He also asked JOHN to mail him an almanac’
. whenever it. was convenient as he liked to refer to the almanac =. |
’. from time to time as a general source of information. JOHN 0s,

‘complied with both requests. Near the end of each month JOHN ~ : Se

has sent. the checks to NAGELL at a Post Office box in El Paso, .
Texas, He also sent him an almanac with.a yellow cover as he. :
\ becalls: it, JOHN did not mark or alter this almanac. in any way.

2 ‘JOHN recently. received a form letter. ‘from a hospital ~
: in Missouri, informing him he had been named as a correspondent.
-authorized to commmicate with RICHARD NAGELL, JOHN has received
no indication that NAGELL is in any sort of trouble, | and he

Wondered what was behind the hospital. letter.

a ’ JOHN has never heard anything about his. ‘receiving
oe four reels of microfilm or “any. personal papers should NAGELL .
‘'dle, JOHN does not have a key to any Safeby deposit box and

-. box, JOHN has heard NAGELL mention his sister but knows |
nothing | concerning any ‘Japanese gas. mask or. anything else

stored with her, ‘untch is to be turned over to him upon ‘NAGELL!s ;

death, . 1

a - - About, a month or two after NAGELL left Los “Angeles
“he wrote to. ‘JOHN, probably just on one: occasion, and that
concerned ‘paying the. rent on the joint postal box.

}: fe
| co JOHN. is of ‘the opinion. NAGELL is a paranoiac in
; . - that he is depressed at the manner his ex-wife treated him
- and the manner in which the local, state, and Federal governments -
... have treated hin, . JOHN definitely considers NAGELL to be mentally
disturbed,


--- Page 184 ---
13-00000

a 6srs 7 oe

; -. JOHN has never heard NAGELL speak in favor of
communism or Cuba, ‘He has never heard of the “Fair Play

“> for Cuba Committee." JOHN has no. indication NAGELL was ever
me involved in espionage.

; -NAGELL never had much money, just his. income’ ‘fron.
- ariving a Yellow Cab and from his disability check. SOEN |
~ does not know if NAGELL had a bank account. |

rar . There is no information din the files of the Los
- Angeles Office of the FBI. identifiable with FRED JOHN,

BANK ACCOUNT: INFORMATION

ws on March 5, 1964, LA ‘21, whose’ information may —

~ not be made public except. upon issuance of a subpoena duces.

~. tecum, stated RICHARD C, NAGELL had commercial checking account .

-- . number 002-857 at the. Wilshire - Virgil Branch of the > Seourdty
a First ‘National Bank, Los Angeles.

a The account “was opened October 2, 1961, with a.

deposit of $350.00, closed January 31, 1963, no balance. .
v: NAGELL gave a bank-referente of Bank of America, Wilshire -
- Vermont Branch, Los Angeles. Upon o ening, residence 1 was given .
.. as “712 ‘Saturn’ Street, telephone WE 4.2739.

a . LA T-1. recalls NAGELL vividly as he caused a “come
.. motion every time he came in the bank, He would shout at
“. the tellers, complain about the service, and threaten to - 7
“" peport the tellers to the management. On one occasion a girl
. teller working next to LA T-l1 wore a red dress to work on a
*. @ay that .NAGELL was in the bank... NAGELL shouted at the girl
4 that only a prostitute would wear a red dress.

PEE LA fu1 thinks some local finance company has been .
- trying to locate NAGELL recently to collect a debt.

‘On’ March | 9, 1964, LA 1.2, whose information may not
be made public.except. upon issuance of a subpoena duces tecum,
“: . Stated RICHARD NAGELL opened commercial checking account

- mumber 9-492 on November 6, 1959, ‘atthe Wilshire - Vermont
Branch of the Bani of America Los Angeles, NAGELL gave his —
address as the’ Cloud Motel, 3h00 West’ Third Street. His bank

reference was” the Union Bank, Mount Holly, New Jersey, and he



--- Page 185 ---
TA 65-74N5
: Be exhibited New. Jersey driver's license number -
- olosed September 27, 1961. ;

- . Part « of this time it was a Joint account with MITSUKO NAGELL, oe Jo

"< INPORMATION FROM INFORMANTS
AND SOURCES OF INFORMATION

- Bo following that they had no information concerning F RIGHARD neo

2. Opening deposit was $900.00, and the account wes

On February 28, 1962, RICHARD NAGELL opened checking OME
account number 3~2873 at this same bank with a deposit of . ©
$143.10, the account being closed on July 16, 1962, During

on March 9, 1964, SA WILLIAM J. MC CAULEY was advised

im ANTHONY F, LIBERATO, “tavestigator,. ;
-.. Immigration and Naturalization Service,
Los. ‘Angéles, who is cognizant of many.

m Cuban activities in Los Angeles.

" MANUEL GONZALEZ, 1070 West Kensington.
“ Road, Los Angeles, who headed the ores,
Castro movement in Los Angeles 19 021962.

Mol MAYER G. ROYAL, 5825 West Pico ‘Boulevard, cule
- °°: Les Angeles, who is acquainted with some_
“activities of the "Fair Play for Cuba-

. Committee," Los Angeles, oo

DA ‘7-3, who is cognizant of many + Cuban
activities. in Los Angeles, :

LA. T4 and LA 75, who are ‘femtliar with.

Communist Party activity.in the general .

area ‘where RICHARD NAGELL has resided in.
Los Angeles. / :

There is no. information of substance in the files
of the Los Angeles Office-of the FBI identifying NAGELL with
any Communist Party, Cuban, or espionage activity.

te


--- Page 186 ---
13-00000

LA 65-7445 >

JOHN NOBURO. MIvaKt (gACK MIYAKT). ‘stated on

-_ March. 23, 1964, to SA HOOSE. that he and his wife, CAROLINE.

MIYAKI, reside at 645 North Westmoreland Avenue, Los Angeles, ~
California. ': MIYAKI did not ‘recognize name or photograph of

-. | RICHARD NAGELL, - When further descriptive data was furnished
’ MEYAKI, he recalled he had met NAGELL on one occasion about

a year ago at The Happy Rabbit, a beer Joint at 2709 West

‘Sixth Street, . Los Angeles .

NAGELL told MIVAKI he either was or had been a>

; Yellow Cab driver, ‘that he had a Japanese wife who had

divorced him,'. MIYAKL. said he possibly told NAGELL he worked

asa machinist at. Aero-Space Manufacturing. Corporation, 3825. __
“4 Cohasset Street, Burbank, California, but cannot recall having ~

' told NAGELL anything else. MIYAKI stated he thinks NAGELL left

» the bar at: the ‘same: time he did which may account for NAGELL. —
‘having MIYAKI's license number. MIYAKI drives a cream ,

edlored 1962 Buick Special, four door, license JOG 823. | ;
(California: Department of Motor Vehicles verifies this license

-is for this ear.) MIYAKI said he does not work on any classi- ;
'. fied materialand has no clearance. MIYAKI was born in Japan, .
'. Naturalized in, Hawait on January 21, 1954, certificate number |
Ten008 6 a

~ Mevaxt ‘is ‘of the opinion he,.and NAGELD only con- “

: . versed about ten or fifteen minutes on this. one occasion, — - _
and he has no information apart from above concerning NAGELL.. aaa i

“There is no. information in the files of the Los 2.
‘Angeles Office of the FBI identifiable with JOHN (JACK) ~ :

2 MEYART: or CAROLINE MIVAKI.

a


--- Page 187 ---
13-00000

tA Toes oe a os - Loge

“p-204 (Rev. K-09

_ oe Pet eeeeeire . : . : :
UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT. OF JUSTICE.
.FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION

a Copy to:
Repo of: ; a oO * Office: - a arin i :
Revere SA DAVID J. REID Ole “BL PASO 20
i July 24, 1964.
Field Office File Now, EP. 65595) oe Bureau File Now 64-4933

D SY. AlyJEK FASK FORGE

: ( Ties. RICHARD CASE NAGELL
10) are = PYee 3s 2 —dlakede

Characters ae ae ELEASE IN PART oo
- SaBe8" ESPIONAGE = x . osm a .
» Synopsis Subject described by a former acquaintance in the

“United States Army in Korea as having had a brilliant
_war record but ag not stable mentally, this. instability ~
‘probably being due to brain tissue damage resulting from an-
airplane erash. during the Korean War. With régard to names:
‘found in the posseesion of the subject when he was arrested
on September 20, 1963, U.S. Army, Japan, advised that the
'-. subject had. previously served in Korea and Jspan and that it:
_- was not unusual for individuals.to retain lists of persons.
in such areas for future reference. U.S. Army,’ Japan, ‘also
advised that the reagon fcr some names in the subject's
‘possession at the time of his arrest-could not be assessed; =...
On June 9, 1964, subject sentenced in the United States District. —
‘Court, El Paso, Texas, to serve ten years under the provisions = =
of: Section 4208 (a) (IL), Title 18,.U.S5. Code, for violation
_ of Section 2113, Title 18, U.S. Code. Subject attempted, suicide"
on June 17, 1964. “SUBJECT HAS ATTEMPTED SUICIDE.

WE!

, ii

: SOF SVES EP
: !
- his document. contains nelther Fecommendations nor conclusions of tke FBI. It.is the property of the FBI and ta loaned to your agency; “it and
its contents are not to be distributed outside your agency.



--- Page 188 ---
EP 65-951.

DETAILS: |
AT TOXYO, JAPAN:

At the time of the arrest of Richard Case Nagell ..

tn El Paso, Texas, on September 20; 1963, on a bank robbery _
charge, he had many papers and documents in his possession.
'. These papers and documents were reviewed and were found to
contain the following notations:

Murat Jun- (cabinet Research

_ ‘OFFice-C.R.0.) (National Rural
Police Agency) (Private Secretary
to P.M. Yoshida) (Intelligence
Agency. in China)= Now in
‘Tukuoka~ SHI ..

Tsio Sai Fue
Literature Dept.

. Tohoku Daigake - /

..  (Naikaku Chosa Shitsu)

Hoshiyama Sadeo (Lee. Chang Suk). cs
c/o Maruei Pachinko.

-169-L" Baba-Machi, Choshi-Shi
Chiba-Ken, Japan

Kin X

: (Kaka So). :
; Ginza, Chuo-ku

‘Tolyo~To (36-5330)

Meotat Ge Eroshhin (FIR)
itary / oviet Embassy -

Envelope addregsed to: Capt. Robert C.
Nolan, Advisor, FROKA Ret. HID ~ .
with return addregs of Col Lee Churl Hi,
CO, HID, ROKA. ———

Bt 7¥8s37



--- Page 189 ---
EP 65-9510

gative * Section, Tohoku Regional
Safety Investigation Bureau + (STB)

‘Public Safety Dept,
Regional | Police Bureau



--- Page 190 ---
7 . 65-951 2

_ ‘Kuriyama\yatsuichi- cc, 6th

: Tel. §6-5339

#2-3 Ginza, Chuo-Iu, ‘Tokyo-to

“photograph with fame ‘Lee Qhang Suk

underneath. Along sidé
is the name Ho
Pachinko Store, 169-
Choshi-shi, Chiba-

photograph a
al Sadao, C/o Maruei ©

; Baba-machi, ~
» Japan

Kaji Wataru



--- Page 191 ---
13-00000

EP.65-951 |

Tohoku Regional Police Bureau

4 12 Prevention Section, Criminal
De rtment, National. Police Agency

An envelope addressed to: Capt
Robert C. Nolan, Advisor,

FROKA det, HID with return.
address of Col Lee Churl Hi,
CO, HID, ROKA

- Four photographs identified on the back
as follows; .

oy (

; In addition, . the subject f had in his possession at ee
the time of his arrest on September 20, 1963, a piece. of -eer
. paper containing the listing of what. appeared to be United
States Army Officers. and their serial numbers. One section.
of this paper was listed under the heading "Third Operations Ll
Group". S

On March 24, 1964, Lieutenant Colonel

. Deputy G-2, United States Army, Japan, advised tat he had
- known the subject personally and had sérved in Korda with

the subject. GLENN noted that his name appeared in one of

the above mentioned photographs of papers which were found . one

in the possession of the subject.when arrested in El Paso TO

on September 20, 1963. GLENN stated that he and the subject

had been attached to an Intelligence Branch of the United

States Army in the Far East during the period of their acquaintance.

GLENN explained that the names in parentheses in
one of the above mentioned photographs were “code names" used

5;



--- Page 192 ---
13-00000

EP 65-951

» by members of Army Intelligence Units in Korea in order to

protect their real identities from informants.

GLENN also advised that the subject was not

. “stable mentally and that this instability was probably due —
‘to damage to brain tissues suffered in an airplane crash

during the Korean War in which the subject was the only ~.
survivor. GLENN stated that the subject, in fact, did have

a brilliant war record, which was the reason for his.

assignment to Army Intelligence in spite of what should

_ have been an obvious, psycholog gical defect. —

GLENN pointed’ out as ‘an example of the gubject' s

instability that the subject had turned in allegations

against an Intelligence: Officer ‘in Korea, which became the
subject of extensive investigation, GLENN added that te
subject was subsequently transferred to another Amy unit

' and upon reporting to that init, was greeted in a friendly.
- way by his new Commanding Officer, who told him he hoped
> the subject would enjoy his new assignment and that he,
the Commander, would’ do ail he. could to make ‘ita | worthwhile
_ tour of duty for’ the subject.

To this, NAGELL allegedly replied | that the Commander ~

had certainly better see that this was the case as, NAGELL

told him, he made a practice of keeping a record of every.
move made by his Commanding Cfficer and if he stepped out,

-. of Line ‘one: whit at any time, it would be made the subject
o£ an inmediate ‘report to higher headquarters.

GLENN made available: a letter from the Assistant

Gites of Staff, G-2/G-3, United States Army, Jepaa, which

was in answer to a request for information regarding the;

subject and which contained the following information:

SUBJECT, after graduation from the Army Intelligence
Scheol, Fort Holabird, Maryla ad, in August 1955, served as an
advisor to the First Republic of Korea Army and subseqently
in Sendai, and Tokyo, Japan, terminating in about 1958.
These assignments were conceraed with intelligence activities,



--- Page 193 ---
13-00000

EP 65-951

as .an advisor to the ROK Ary in Korea, and as a member of the
' US Army Counterintelligence Corps in Japan. During the .
. latter tour o£ duty, the counterintelligence unlit vas designated os
the 3rd Operations Group, with Headquarters in Tokyo and. .
- Detachment B in Sendai, as veferred to in photegraphic inclosures
‘to your letter. o

In assignments of this nature it is common practice
for members to become acquainted with personnel of various.
Japanese sé@curity. agencies, such as are mentioned in March
5 Memorandum of the FBI, EL Paso, Texas, It is not unusual
for individuals assign ned counterintelligence duties to retain —
lists of these persons for reference in the event they are
‘again reassigned to the area, or for dispatching cards or
thank you notes fron the United States. This would “appear
to be the reason for SUBJECT having kept the list of agency
personnel, although to have retained the list for a number of
years after leaving the service appears unusual. The names Kaji,
Wataru and Jack Cannon were known to thé public as the results ©
of allegations of illegal intelligence operations that were :
publicized in the Japanese pres 8, but SUBJECTS reason for .
including those names in HIS listg camnot -be assessed. Also, —

' mo reason can be given for the two ox three miscellaneous .. _
‘ names in NAGELL'S file. ; oo .

The. list of Americans mentioned in one of the’ photographic
attachments pertains to US personnel in the intelligence field.
It appears that the subject maintained a roster of those personas =
with whom he would or had contact, which is mot unusual.
Ynformation contained on those rosters, particularly that
“portion indicating code names, was and is regarded as classified
information by this off ice. : ; cei!

Files of ‘the Countexiintelligence Repository, USARJ,
disclosed no information reletiye to NAGELL or of his aliases.

he

‘AT EL PASO, TEXAS;

On June 9, 1964, Federal Judge HOMER THORNEERRY, United

7.


--- Page 194 ---
13-00000

«EP 65-951 ragpeemnement.
Sta ates Dietrict Court, dented the motion for a new trial,
-and. sentenced the subjéct to serve ten years. under the.

_- \JACK GRAVES said seconal pills had been prescribed for tie.
: “subject and. that. the subject evidently had been hoarding them,

parole at any time it is deemed advisable. This sentence
Code.

-:on June 17, 1964... According to the article, NAGELL was to

_.+ Federal Correctional institution’ Hospital u unless his condition -
_ improved. : .

provisions of Section 4208 (a) (II), Title 18, United States
Code, which provides that the subject can be released under -

was for violation of Secticn 2113, Title 18, United States
: The June 17, 1964 issue of “The EL Paso. Herald

Post", contained an article entitled "Inmate ‘Serious*: After
Suicide Try". According to the article, the subject swallowed
several sleeping pills while lodged at the El Paso County Jail

‘be kept under observation all night and was to be transferred
‘to the William Beaumont General Kospital from the La Tuna

The. article further stated that Deputy U.S. Marshal

—-

cio

-


--- Page 195 ---
13-00000_. .. «- 7 _ ae. oo.
oes ; ef : . ~o foe : oe ne j
Te | RICHARD: CASE NAGRLE, AKA. “~. Born-8-,-30, Greanwich, NY.

JO# CRAMER rs eo,
JOE KRAMER oo
JOE CRANE a
ROBERT Cs NOLAN ©

. Nagell claims ‘around the middle on 1962, the was “in Washington, dD;

- Cy and he had been approached by an individual whom he felt was

- either a Special Agent-of the FBI or a Soviet Esplonage Agent. He said
he meet this person in a bar in Washington, D.C. located at 811 14th st,
NW. He said this person talked of Domestic Intelligence | and © also. talked |

of giving “ae an intelligence | assignment.

ure Dyepiened 0% Devin Code Dney rea, CA .
mossy Stes Nagell claims in September, 1962, he was invited to attend a

Bho Te) *peception at the Soviet Embassy. He states he contacted CIA at. either |
amet Langley, Virginia, or Elwood, Virginia, and used the name of - a
saken JOE CRAMER or KRAMER during this contact with CIA,He said he told CIA -

..< the-above information and wanted some advise as to whether to go
we, through with such an assignment. CIA told him to (see ‘the FBI.

oe : Nagell. said he went to the. above © bar and there: was contacted

by the same person and was told to go to Miami, Florida, to a bar and~
“Wear a red sweater, where he would be contacted, _. aad
: _ Certain material was seized from Nagel when he was, arrested a

_ on bank robbery charges on 9/20/63.

ee: ER ¥en

at CIA : . .
Mo The: following » names were. located on material and papers taken
from. Nagell/ a ;
RICHARD PECTEAU,LYNN, Mass

"(-DAC)'( C.I.A. Boe . ne
BR sbi (MASS) (JAN. 6B) . a ep

GeTeAe an : .
3%. Mr.F.PARKER) 0) 1s. 7 no
2. Miss GUTHRIES oo 7 - . ree
3. Mr. C. Churchill us Fe
ky Me Je DA VANON ——&0* oe

5. Mr -SLOSS a
6. Mr z LEIBACHER ~6(4) > 4.4 ~.

VLA.

i
1
i
re.


--- Page 196 ---
13-00000

; rl Rad

_ APR 4964

MEMORANDUM FOR: The Director .
Federal. Burean of Investigation,

ATTENTION. i Mr, William ©, Creger

| Case Nagel, aka

suBsECT a
a Joe|Gramer

Reference ig made to 3 mémeranduzn from your Burenu -
dated 2 October 1962, captioned as above. Representatives of your
Washington Field Office have advieed that Richard Gase Nagel! is
currently under arrest far bank robbery and that the jollowing names _

and information were contained on material and papers i in the posses~°
sion of Nagel: ;

RICHARD FECTEAU, Lyan, Mass”
(DAC) (GLA) | 7 oe
R S8244 (MASS) an. oy <.. ;
Gh A. . .

lL. Mr. F.. PARKER

2 Miss GUTHRIES:

3. Mr. ©. CHURCHILL
_ & Mz. J. DA VANON

8. Mr, 3, SLOSS ~

6 Mr. E. LEIBACHER _

_ the records of this Agency have been searched in. degard
to the shove individoals with the following resulte: 7 “eee :

+



--- Page 197 ---
13-00000

ce Richard Gearge Fectent
. . Fettéau wae taken P ;
‘operation in November i9s2.

oe rent Agency. emplaree. | whe mene bown £ Sanuary 1096,,
oe Rentnghy: | oan "

cently employed. by thin Agency: :

“Richard Pactesu,. Lynn, Masa. " is undoubtedly identical. to
who ip in prison in Communist China.
te by the Gommmniate dosing tn n Agency

“Me, B Parker" may be ‘identical te Joba, Stoya Barker, curs.
rc ville,

Nase. Guthries day be identical to pei “Agnes Guthrig,
‘born. 29 February 1908, Charleston, Went Virginia, who.is ateo cu cure.

Churchill may be identical to Creighton Churehi tt .

. who was ‘born J October 1912, Gornieh, New Hampshize, whose pree--

dress 4.6 not knows and whose address in 1988 wan ld Weat 44th

Street, New: ‘York City.

doh Floyd Parker and Frances Gotnrie ba have been interviewed —

recollection at having ever: met Richard Cae

shaved fr Sk eters i Dagan tm oo oes
Paske:

‘approsivoate 3 SS paced, sithough « apéct~ :
aa canny be made kn view of the Lemnited tn-

1 : i eartently ‘employed in. Head-
a tn mn Richard Sloss. has been interviewed in



--- Page 198 ---
13-00000

OSISRS/BracelSolie:jrg - .6 Apr 64

«3e-

regard to. any y knowledge of Nagell and has advised that he has no.

- Fecollection of having met any individual by that name. If Sonn:

Richard Sloss-is identical to “J. Slone,” it in. not possible from -

“available information to even speculate as to how the name came

inte the possession: ‘of Nagel.

In view of the feet that Richard George Fecteau ie currently

in prison in China and the indication that the other six name listed

above may refer ta Agency employees, it is: requested that |

_ above information not be disseminated outside your Bureau. It
_- Gees: net appear that the above information could affect either the
_: propecution of or the, defense of Nagell o
__ bery and disclogure of the above information

arge of bank reb-
id create a later
Be well ge ‘tirecting additions? at~

cover problem for this Agency,

_ fention te the ponition of Fecteau.

It would be appreciated if your Bureau would advise this

-Agency of any information brought to your attention concerning how
the shove names came inte the possession of Nagelt.

FOR THE DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE:

R, L. Bannerman
Director of Security

: iverreto pecreny oH sivey
oO
Joy Flop PARKER | +H je
: Five At Nés CuT Rte a YY? val
(etc wre CH ee HI eG sHe 46 75
fevernty SLOSS ot 24440
vewer a 6774760

ERNST L E)Gacher



--- Page 199 ---
OPTIONAL FORM NO. 10 nots | : SEGRET a
SOI i. (
4 . , 5

UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT

TO

FROM

SUBJECT:

REF

Memorandum

‘Chief, Security Research Staff, 0S “DATE: | 27 March 1964 |

. ATT: Mr. Robert Leonard
Acting cites Contact, Division, 00 ae
NAGELL, Richard Case -- Arrest in EL Paso/List, of Names
- - pred "CIA". -

Telephone ‘converdtions between Mr. Robert leonard

and Mrs. Virginia Thorne, 26 and 27 March 1964.

1. Enclosed for your records and any action you
may consider appropriate, are copies of seif-
explanatory ‘teletypes from our San Francisco,
Office concerning Subject's- arrest in El Paso.

2. Any questions pertaining to this. memorandum

should be directed to Mrs. Virginia Thorne,
Ext-2202. .

Mage ae

fear 2 W.. MCCONNELL

ENCLOSURES: As stated above.

ing
dectassification



--- Page 200 ---
13-00000°

: Meta

‘DE e6AT/26: 26/03510
R 2608302 ZEA

- ™ : | CINHISTORICAL M

SEXES TEA. . RELEAS

ae!

‘TWO TWO SIX.WA

is
*

aT Oe

5
F

sre R: ET TDTS: ‘2628802
en CITE LANG: 823A
TNDEX (THORNE? FRON DEV6NON
susde RICHARD CASE KAGELL
REF s CA) LANG $286
CB) WAe63594
ce) WA 6519 . . a
ON 0 MAR G4, FBIeLA ADVISED UE THAT OUR EXPRESSION CREF A}
~ SLOSED THE HATTER FoR THEN, AWD THAT FURTHER RGERCY CONTACTS,”
“TF ABY, VOULD PROBABLY BE VIA FRIevASHENGTON FEELD OFFICES
SECRET. re .
"CFM: 8294 THORNE. DEVARON RICKARD CASE NAGELL E2BG 63194 65519 Pe Ee
FRTSLA REF & FRISWAEKINGTCR |
BT

i sot \
yates wa
excl

ae 0

ae



--- Page 201 ---
13-0@000

CREIGHTON. CHURCHILL : WOODSTOCK, VERMONT

18 April 1964
T.FLoyp pakvée “las 0

hos
; : P te fxr 73876
CREIéH Tew CHyeenee HYCS7

. It was good to hear from you, to learn
you are still at the old shop; etc...

stu

Dear Floyd:

I got your letter yesterday in New York,
and while driving the 300-odd miles hoped that my
subconscious. would perhaps come out with a peal of
a bell regarding an individual named Ed Nagell. But

- no bellsrang.

I have only a.small- hunch —~'a piccolo-—toot
in my memory. Whe. I worked for the shop I once went
to see Mr. James Bennett, Director of Federal Prisons,
( with whom I had once shared a table on an ocean
liner, years before). . You can guess why I wanted to
see Bennett: I was seeking ways for birds to fly out
of cages. Bennett mentioned a guy (‘with a questionable
record, as far as he was concerned) who claimed to
know us, you and me, what we were doing., etc. etc.

He had. aproached Bennett " as from us". Ed Nagell

-- the name -- rings a piccolo-toot on this, But~only
that. Incidentally, I filed a report on the incident
when I got back to the shop.

I am often in New York -- at the Harvard
Club -~ and should you ever be in town, give me a ring.
It would. be fun to see you. I met Harry Csterweis in-
a restaurant the other day -—- fater some many, -many----—~.....---
‘years. You.may remember him.

I have recently become an author an Vines. |
After a year in France in 1989, I wrote a book on French
wines which was. published by Knopf, and am about to bring
out one on wines of the world with MacMillan in September.
That is about the extent of ‘my news.

Wo

My best to you.


--- Page 202 ---


--- Page 203 ---
ee , an
Richard Case NAGELL

Chronological Record of Activities _

5 Aug 1948: ‘Entered Army (18 years old)
. , "Brilliant Korean War Record"
“Many Campaign Awards"

28 Nov 1954: Sole survivor of plane crash. Suffered facial ‘disfigure-
ment; given. psychiatric exam.

15 Aug 1955: © Graduated from Army Intelligence School, Ft. Holabird,
Maryland. Served.as advisor to ROK Army in Korea.
Concerned with intelligence activities; served as a member —
of U.S. Army Counterintelligence Corps in Japan, Sendai
and Tokyo, terminating about. 1958.

A Lt. Col. Ned W. GLENN, Deputy G-2, U.S. Navy,
Japan, advised on 24 March 1964 that he had served °
personally in Korea with NAGELL. GLENN advised
that NAGELL was not stable mentally and that this in-
» stability was probably due to damage to brain’ tissues
suffered in:an airplane crash during the Korean War.

mye

when

29 Oct 1959: Honorable Discharge -. Captain; U.S. Army
14 Dec 1959: Employed by Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control
of State of California'as a special investigator........0.--.-c--=
8 June 1962:. _—. Suspended by ABC, State of California .

27 June 1962: . Dismissed by ABC

16 July 1962: Shot in chest ‘while making a meet" between Malibu and ;
‘Oxnard. Refused to identify assailants or furnish infor-
mation to police, subsequently, filed Civil Rights com-
plaint against police. Withdrew request for hearing so
he could get money from state of California consisting of
retirement contributions and accumulated leave.

17 Aug 1962: Issued tourist card at Los Angeles, California.

24 Aug 1962: -. Entered Mexico through Ciudad, Juarez.



--- Page 204 ---
28 Sept 1962:

_ 1 Oct 1962:

28 Oct 1962:

16 Nov 1962:

15 Dec 1962:

Appeared voluntarily at American Embassy, Mexico City,
tense, nervous, agitated and antagonistic.

Inter alia-stated he had béen approached in Mexico

City for recruiting, refused to say by.whom on behalf of
what country. Stated that one job of this sont would be

in New York, He volunteered that he fully realized that
what he was saying could be used against him in any
court. or prosecution. He stated that he was "bitter,
disgusted, disillusioned and disaffected". Stated he knew
the full significance of the term disaffected. He stated
that if he did go to some other country, it would cost the
United States millions. He stated that he was "through
being a good citizen'' and thought that he had gotten a
“dirty deal all around."

Again appeared at American Embassy, Mexico City,
wanting to know what-had been done in regard to getting
the state of California to pay him-the money due him.
Was sent to protection section, Asked what section of
Embassy he should contact to renounce his ‘United States
citizenship. Was advised by collection section that they
could not intercede for him in collecting money from
state of California, Appeared in passport and citizenship
section and asked what the penalty would be for going to
an Iron Curtain country and what effect it would have on
his citizenship. Was advised that such action would be
violation. of federal: law.

Left Mexico City, México. : Dory nh sts gaa gases

Advised FBI in New York City he wanted to expose.
Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control in California.

Advised FBI in Jacksonville, Florida, that he had been
approached shortly before in Washington, D.C., by.
individual believed to be working for Soviets. NAGELL ;
at this time was noted to be in an inebriated condition -
vague. in answering questions.

20 Dec 1962: 22 Jan 1963: NAGELL at Bay Pines, Florida VA Hospital.

Condition diagnosed as "chronic brain syndrome associated
with brain trauma with behavioral reaction characterized
by passive aggressive and paranoid features".

~2-



--- Page 205 ---
24 Jan 1963:

19 April 1963:

| 4 June 1963:

20 Sept 1963:

court order giving NAGELL visitation rights with children,

Asked FBI in Miami if his Cuban or Russian sources

gave him a pistol with silencer and microfilm if he

would be permitted to return same to his contact so ,
he could be of further use to U.S. Government. He
stated that.in August or September 1962 he met a man
from Maryland.in Mexico City who introduced him to
individuals whom heibelieved may have been Soviet Agent.

Advised FBI in Los Angeles, ‘California, that-he had
taken his former wife to court for failure to comply with

NAGELL appeared at the Qut Palient Clinic and was re-
ferred to the Neurological Clinic for treatment. His
condition was diagnosed as'depression, tearful, neryous,
rigid". . Would only utter words "Got to see my kids",

NAGELL arrested in El Paso, Texas, on charge of at-
tempting to rob State National.Bank.’ Slashed wrist night

of 9/20/63. NAGELL consistently denied he had tried

to rob the bank; stated that the fact that he fired two shots
in the ceiling proved he had not been trying to hit anyone.
He stated that he was certain that "all of my problems have
been solved for a long, time, and now I won't have to go to
Cuba". ;

A notebook which the Subject had on his person when ar-
rested made reference to Fair Play for Cuba Committée,
the names of purported CIA agents and’ other information.
Cell mate in jail reported that NAGELL disclosed to him
that NAGELL, during confused period after dischatge,
decided everything against him ‘in Los Angeles and made
arrangements with Communist Party in Los Angeles to
pick up visa and passport from contact in El Paso and
eventually end up in Czechoslovakia. NAGELL reportedly
attempted suicide three times enroute to El Passo but
lost nerve.

(Noteworthy that State Department records reflect issuance
of Passport to NAGELL on 7 August 1962 at Los Angeles,
California, and that on 9 July 1963 NAGELL signed affi-
davit that his passport had been lost or stolen. He was
issued a new passport on 6 August 1963.)



--- Page 206 ---
13-00000

< a _ soe (° SERRET~ (
: | 4 Nov 1963:° ' El Paso Herald-Post article states that NAGELL told
U.S, District Court that he did not attempt to hold up
the bank, "I had a motive for doing what J did" NAGELL

told Judge, "but my motive was not to hold up the bank,
I do not intend to disclose my motive at this time."

19 Dec 1963: | Subsequent to President's assassination, Subject claimed
acquaintance with OSWALD and wife. Marina OSWALD
~on 1/18/65 disclaimed any knowledgé of NAGELL,

1 Jan 1964: NAGELL furnished a signed statement:

'... In September 1962,.while I was in Mexico ‘City,a
representative of a foreign government preposed to me
that I participate in an act; such act being a criminal
offense and inimical to the best interest of the United
States. At that time, I refused such proposal. In May
1963,. another: representative of the same foreign govern-
ment made the same proposalto me. At that time, I
agreed to such a proposal." ;
"In September 1963, I was informed by an American,
‘known to me as an Agent of the same foreign government,
that arrangements for my participation in the aforementioned
act were completed. At that time, I refused the aforesaid
proposal.
Approximately one week later,.I was instructed by this
same person to either participate as previously agreed
or derrogatory information pertaining to me would be
disclosed to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, There-
upon, I agreed to follow the instructions of this person, ~~

' although I did not intend to do so. -This existing situation
actuated my conduct of September’20, 1963, for which I
was arrested and am presently charged.
I did not actually attempt to rob any bank. “I thought ‘that

- my arrest.would provide an immediate, though temporary,
solution.to the problem with which I was confronted,
Iam not guilty as charged."

24 Jan 1964: NAGELL arraigned in connection with indictment for
; bank robbery and was committed for 30 days for the
purpose of psychiatric examination,

9 June 1964: , Sentenced in U.S. District Court, El Paso, Texas to
serve 10 years. ;

17 June 1964: NAGELL swallowed several sleeping pills while lodged

at the El Paso EERk Jail.

-4-

epray erate ign enter mening perenne


--- Page 207 ---
13-00000

: Be - ask ber + Pimeal
2 a - a Tals Out PY of he TTR, eels Kr
ot Scal Te i LA
: 7 le eee sane? oF “The ‘Lemp

m4 Re: Lack 6
Be As Wee Ms Ae daw “fo

Inde PART PTE YN rk
lieu: Ise Boma Doge



--- Page 208 ---
13-00000
'

\
ia

| EAs UNCLASSIFIED Es secret

SUBJECT: (Optional):

roa” er onsnet COMMENTS (Number each comment to ‘show from whom

ion, room number,
to whom. Draw a line across column after each comment.)

Tom 610 ne


--- Page 209 ---
TAITIALS

" CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
ATIN: MR. JAMES LUDLUM

COORDINATION |
_

VERSATION

SS
z ‘g]
>

The attached is forwarded for your information since
your Agency is mentioned by Nagel], the writer of the
letter to Mr. Plant, Special Assistant, Office of

UnderSecretary of the Army.

Nagell was at one time in crc.

Tt seems that he may be mentally unbalanced.

‘Nagell's dossier is available in Security Divison, ©
OACSI DA for your review if desired.

Do NOT use this form as-a RECORD of ‘approvals, concurrences,
-disapprovals,. clearances, and'similar actions

DATE

\ Jun 70

PHONE

x77017

Gro: 1969 op—ss2-020 - 5043-301

f Yash, CI Div, OACSI DA

OPTIONAL FORM a
"GSA Prin ‘tio 100-11. 206 |



--- Page 210 ---
13-00000

Francis. x. “Plant. oo
Special’ Assistant : .

“Office, Under Secretary of ‘the Army,
‘Room ‘1E520,: The Pentagon.
Washington, ° ‘D. Cae

Dear| Me. Plant:

eo In: “further.” ‘reference to ny lette TOM. Svitzerland: ‘ uring our, “eonver~

: ation. of 6 April you made it clear that. I.must step. dack into tine and prove”
the existence of a condition over ten years ago. that. ‘could: ‘and should have

been: ‘resolved -by ‘the Army then. . 4°. a feat, thet is all the more complicated
Sby the ABCMR's-refusal- to interview. ‘the | ap propriate witnesses, view certain: +-
pertinent. records. and. to place: “the: blame . for’ my2:flot. “receiving en adequete’”
medical examination where it delongs._ : . :

i believe:s what you realy ‘meant to: say was. “that ‘in ny. particular case _
(as: opposed to others. ‘much less valid) the. function of. the Board to° cor rect:
an injustice : ‘does not epPly... . :

: $0 if this as sumption ‘is. fact, | as r ave every. reason’. to feel it is, ‘then.
ou: may “pass on to the Secretary that before my case is closed: the’ Army. will be
confronted witha scandal. that will: “make - France' Ss. Dreyfus: -affeir. seen. inconse~_
uential by comparison.” I'am. ‘not quite the. fool that” y apparently, Tr have deen
taken,.for. - woe

. “Enclosed are some. xerox copies of several documents yhich. your ‘house-.-
cleening- office. mignt - ‘find. of interest... The originels, together with.
‘numerous other documents and the details about’ them, are safely locked
evay. a . ; Ce oe



--- Page 211 ---
13-00000

~ deceptive. “y had killod before and -I had participated § in 1 homicidal tnder the auspices, of.
. » both, MT and the CIA ‘Cone instance being the part I played in the Fob
- interrogation-murdor of. an FOI ‘agent, a U.S. soldier,

“wary 1958 abduction= |

Rs

Pay suspected . of having -defacted, in-place to the Chinese); ~yade

‘.merican’ « variation of. the Soviet. “yet. affair" was the only a tormitive, that. it vas

: either:.-essential — to. some overall: “intelligence. effort or in the best interests,of our
“national security... cand ‘ito was. a simi lar-sounding argument, ‘ultimately reduced toa:


--- Page 212 ---
Oo TE saisoet:
erday

declined, ‘conmiient, KY
Creported | tilat Dug
engaged in ounderes
gation Of the flow af U.S

‘suicide. .
ar, both Jépanes
tary: polica- Investi

“e. announced. trat it!
against a ‘stone walt
f- chuves .to, the -deatic
Emmett aon Dugan.”

vonfirmed—that Ut
i! ed Army authoritle:
connection Ww th to question Mrs,

7 dn-order to exhau. t
“The ais one. ‘deanke your { tities,

bility tha: Dugan was not mre | IY spoKesmnay
generaliy elievat | Zamia, odid- 2nek Army
"e ‘committed elie T Guarters at Ft M
7 eee asked by

So: ne Of the qu
«Japanese : po

Haisappea
Dugan tis:
ter, leaving |. : “ata Tokyo
hotel. . ce,
{. Suppo: “she theory, thi
: j Dagan nu committed

re is “possi le”
son ta drow

“nol

2 said “the
8 not been des ><
are fairly sure
e of suffoca

\ he Arimy: “spo Chad
man said, “nethiag ‘ne’ has
Vie uncey eved in ihe ease my
fay. . ae —_
. Dugan



--- Page 213 ---
13-00000



--- Page 214 ---
13-00000

“177 ALU. ae
Kore. 1956+1957. and R.A HID...

operations’ ‘spon ‘sored’ and directed. by”
‘UNS. KMilitery. Intelligence. ;

sy

_ PANMUNIOM, Kore: ca. (AP\_—The- UN. Command Sa i
lurday labeled.“ ‘completely false” a a Communist charge thaj
Jan armed raidiig party from-the Republic of Korea’ brok.
“tinto-a- North. Korean village and killed: a far mer and kid) -
naped a teen-age “boy. ;
“fhere. is no evider

the ‘Communist clatre . .
Ww omannfactured. fo,

eaded Abree



--- Page 215 ---
13-00000

SAN-NI, Korea ‘Wry. r Tho NOK sol
r Command Military - Avniist-j story to the MAC joint ‘onse
© Commission discloses that Red] team Which eeset
Chinesa- troops created. a . shoot- s gations Sept. 2
ing’. incident At a ‘Moon: festi nict |
party with a Republic. of Kore Vom to “fomplete
patrob:in Morea’ Denuitarize {tions

about five -miles noithwest of |: ‘ran 3 Ro

Kumhwa on the eas: central sec-4 Ch
lor of the truce £ cee

‘testimony. given by the “ ye cen
“Tor soldiers « “involved | in Commun sé and
fncident “has placed. respon- troops patrol!
ibility + (for the ine: cident) upon} cad Zone. -
ho. -C nists.”? “2b Boldiers

. ; : . Sy ist’ said
An American sponsored ‘and | directed athe trees opencd.-f

“attempt to kidnap @ Chinesé soldier 7 , patiot
~ (Intelligence. Agent) curing: peacetime
20 September 1956. . ee

~ The ROK saldiors said Uh
Chinesa: fired ‘More. shots
. | briel Incident. 0

A fourth: Chines,
toni one a

Tho “MAC.
tire” Commun

quite a story behing this one,
since one of them was” an
siye officer.

. Korea - “(UN
vA. Unitcd Nations -¢
representative

“wholly *

under CF
the mil ;
: on
petrate “hos.
. oe Si 5 Nesses
oh Jamen “ Pysen bY a Minticy atin . :
Feber | oF the: UNG Rl Joint oheviver tenn May CHAR AL
ment cof’ tha team that | 23+ ve “ Hona of the
i . ine Aceording ty, P pletely antou
Mst counters chun fie ou
- . - Crossed the ay
fal exumie |



--- Page 216 ---
13-00000

ZL

ans
bens
eg
9

i2

“Box: 2337, Grd. Cen gta
New York, N.Y. 10017 ©
USde

“Mr. Francis X. Plant.
Special Assistant .
"Office, Under Secretary’ of. the ‘army.
“Room: 1ES20, The Pentegon.
Washington, ‘De C. 20300 .. :



--- Page 217 ---
13-00000



--- Page 218 ---
* CPT ROBERT C. NOLAN, ASN: 01438346 = cpt RICHARD Cc. NACELL,.
: ASN 02028346

*Tean 26, Combined Comm end for Reconnaissance Activities Far

East (C- CRAFE)
| *ACRAFE
#USACRAFE
HID
FOI
cic

BIAISON SECTION, ARMY COORDINATING DETACHMENT



--- Page 219 ---
13-00000 _

he
PN:
- oT . i : . : / Mr. Francis X. Plant
i : we . . “Special Assistant to the Under Secretary i
: u : of the Army .
' > Room 88520, The Pentagon

sg . . ; Washington, D.C. 20310



--- Page 220 ---
| Chief, Research Branch, SRS

Robert a decnars a - :
~. John Richard SLOSS
= #344900 re

; 7 “is name is perhaps i identical with
- a name among six names of Agency employees found on a mentally dis. —
turbed and disaffected former CIC intelligence officerwhe alleges contact
with Russian and Cuban Intelligence agents: lg .



--- Page 221 ---
a

ally unbalanced, he tells a story of being involved in espionage which is. 7
. not fully contradicted by evidence. There is no apparent explanation of |
“why the name J. SLOSS as well as five other names of CIA personnel. -
‘should have been in the possession of Richard Case NAGELL. .. The weird..
. » story of NAGELL is contained ina chrobological Histing « of his activities ;
ood appended to thie memorandum. ; a

3. “The name , of John SLOSS may be identical with the name a oe

“SLOSS found on the person of Richard Casz NAGELL when arrested i imcon-=
nection with.a bank robbery in El Paso, Texas, on 20 September 1963. A020.) -}
“notebook found on NAGELL made reference to Fair Play for Cuba Commits
. tee, the addresses of F oreign: Embassies, the names of purported CIA. <_

agents and other information. Although NAGELL is unquestionably ment-. ne


