
--- Page 1 ---
14-aanon
104-10173-10078) | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |

a ee <) |)
; . 17 Juse 1983
Saas ena
CONTACT REFORE: . VASLOUCH/2,: DI WBALDO, and pease
pares . 119 & 20 May 1963. _
PLACE. 1 Sanda fotel-
wes ; _ Mat Dosen, lorie

aoe 1, . DORENOSB and DI \ALDO sierived by: tant at cle Bande F

ie flogal at dipproatmataly 2330 hours and in the. lobby paseéd tho
Subject, her traveling eonpanion, Kio. DI Stiva (sothar of

| Brasilien charge, CARBOA)- ond Mr. & Mre, kart PLASTERER (See
Contact Report’ dated 3 May 1963). why whora thay had spent the
eventing. while ths. ewe ease officers. ‘were wagotiating. rocsia,
with the doak. elork, VASLOUCH/2 anda 6 point of asking for her

. hey’ whieh indicated her ‘reos Busber and the. ease officere ware

i. hetefere able to get rooms en the floor just below hers,

(WOT: Our contacts with VASLOUCH/2 were dépeodent upon the

amount of time she could apend avny ton her wmnvleting travel ing”

a companion.) As provicuely arranged, Bt UBALDO went to the,

_” | Babjest'a hotel room at 0700 hours the siext porning and brought
her to his room where. the debriefing tock place, At ‘the out i
gat DORENOSE was introduced as Willian Cline and 4t wae explained |

that DI WALDO wae weving out of the opsration, This inttial = * |
|
|
|
|
i

2

wecting which lasted uati) 0900 hours eas confined priestly to
tee topless one, VASLOUCH/ 1's contact with and eultivation of por

Peenaisee SAKCHEZ whe is charged with sens road building projects

oer PESSIX .

SECPET:



--- Page 2 ---
14-0000
1

me SECRET

a esveral years ‘vastouca/2 had. bei eontaeted ‘at thé ‘Beastie oe
‘Embassy by Volentine 3. LsUTHOY,. ea attache at tha Soviat x
REebsosy. These contecta took place every tis or threa months

last of chess budinese contacts wae in. Pobrvary of chis years
On 27 April, while ‘vASLoUCB/2 wae in tented City, losunv,

; phoned’ the Brosiliss, Babaacy aoking for vastoucn/a and when
infomsed thet aha vss not dn, requeeted her Keaa’ phona menber :
(walisted) frda tho. giv)” ‘answering’ the phone, Hilda BOLIVAR:
Agizl ‘friend of SANCHEZ), The: girl wefesas. ‘to give out the
msiber. et 1600 en 1 uy, Logue apparently having . acquired a
the wander. frca fhe consuls Mat, called VASLOUCH/2 ry her . :

| hone oaly to be told thae. VASLOUCH/2. was ‘eorkiog that weroing. |

; : at the Brasilien Babnosy. ie finally. got. VASLOUCH/2 | ‘on the |
pa. _ telephone: at 1600: hours and stated that the date vesan

 Auportane holiday for his ond that he wished to visit the .

: VASLOUCHIS with hie fasily to bring a sah present for vaaLoice/2,
LOGUTBOY and family arrived at VASLOWII/2¢0 howa at 1800 hours
and steyed until 2100 hours, Yhe prewimet: sao a bottle of "Red

* é

SECRET, .

when LOGUTHOV would bring visa requests fren bis Babaaay. The rn ie

<r rset een ent ine nt net te ni ee eee een : :


--- Page 3 ---
14-0000

SEE -

' The ‘evening "wae coal ined to omall talk, -
3 vay, Losiitnoy again Called: and wade dinner date with,
/easLoven/ 2 a8. hor husband for 10 May.” ‘Losurroy and wife ‘phekod, 2 A!
e VASLOUCES in Chair private ear and the evening (2130 =
0630). ‘wo spent at: the capri ‘Restaurant. Because of the noise
/ fram the floor show,. again little of Bote was. dlocussed, The.

Gg cost ef the east wae approsinetely 910. at ‘the reataurant,
1). RegUTNOV fiiviited the VASLOUCURS to attend‘ fecapeton and showing
08 ha Soviet passdnger plane, 116, ge be hald st 12:50 <a coe
“16 Mey, vastoocn/2 did aot ettend. beeause he was leaving, for *
Wants: thea VASLOUG/1 eolophonet VASLOUCH/2 in Hieat on 17 May,
és Bodttoned, ta German, that Valentina hed agsin dropped by. .
_ Free these eontecta with LoGurKov the following hed bean
observed by wastoucu/2. He te approximately, 32 years ‘old,

_ Speaks flisent- ‘Spanioh- with jase & slight: aedent. and a litelo
English, He hao: ‘been in cuba three years and was fluent tn -
-Spaaish when he. arrived. Be ‘te appronizately | 6 fest’ ‘ead, weighs wee

; , about, ‘185. Iba, strongly baile, has ble even, blond wavy hole, -

- eonsave forehead, good eooeh, | and aresaes. weld eth esat and
‘meskeis. Ba Sxtwpe hinselt tia ‘an Anorlesa. ear {Dedge? ) with — : |
~ inomediplosatie plates, Ha saotes and drinks in modezation, Ho
has a throa and oastnal? year old sot, sn olavea year old me
daughter ant ndé parente and hie wilo's. parents are living fa
‘Moscow, His witers meaes8 ig Aleuaniin, she 4s attractive end
werkes in the csasilar office. Her {putieh ia poor, He was
aware that VASLOUEH/2 had viaited Mesipw recently and also mew

that the VASLOUCHES daughter sas wit, he ‘Bedatiles Babassy ia

SECRET



--- Page 4 ---
14-0000

SECT

Hoscow. |
One thing ‘that atayed in V/2+s mind waa thet in conversation |

-. whth LOGUINOV he referred on three, oséasions to the possibility -
= chat: ‘their daughter : might, very ‘well Smarty 4 ‘Russia, a point :

thae’ aight ‘relate: to any. operational apptosehi LOGUINOV may.
woke. to the VASLOUCHES, v/a, atated that Locuiwov was the caly |
one that hed ever eos fo tha Braailisn Babasay regarding visas.

_ Sha aleo stated that ever tha past yesra ahe has called bis
' efflee four or five tines ragarding visea and ‘has never been.

able to reach him, ¥/2.aleo recalled that during their outing
at ‘the Capri Restaurant LocuIEOy stated hat. he was planning to
rent .@ beach howse and waa Looking . fotward’- ta ‘ ghia VASLOUCHES:
spending time with his’ and hts wife thewe ducing the sumer

_ wenthe. V/L Lnquired ag a: the dhereabaute of the former —
> PRAVDA correspondent, Borovehy, and waB told be waa in Moogow.: _

a. The Finniah Anbadsador in Washington’ ‘hag bean kept
informed. en- LOGUINOV'e advances toward the SLouciRS, ‘Rie only i

», Somiaene at this potat was. thee. "thay: are attar sosothtag.* wa
: nes : :

wiasd CANBOA whowe resctioa has beca to. encourage’ ite.

rolationshts in hopes of ‘acquiring eowa polieteal ‘inforsatton -

» from LocuINOV. The Finnish Anbassador also PEAS LSA /ERAELAAAEAL-
PULA obttAg/dt/ etated in hie “galephone conversation with. w/a
in Miasi that he had requested tat the SLOU sous installaticn
ba elevated and given dipleaagi« atatus, He expressed suprise

that afoppy of bis letter to ttn Cuban Yoraign Ministry had not
4 : ‘

Also thse “VASLOUCH/} had recently ‘been back to Finland. _



--- Page 5 ---
14-0000

ET

been recelved by V/L and proutsed a epéetol delivery copy of

.  CoROHA, ateted. that hee was Foquest ing Hale inks fo ratso, the
“etatus of ite: ‘Yeptesentat ion: ia Havans: and’ to pose a charge

it to V/2 in Mimat, Relating to this, v/2 ototed to the C/O _

‘that ‘tn ond of V/1'e meetings with COROHA of the ‘Foreiga Offico, ;

there. V/2 was" ‘told. by" the, C/o: thae- after cheeking with.

Headquartare ‘gonderning “‘Losutmoy a: background, specific guldoned - -
. @a how to handle the relationship would be forthcoatng,.

3. frou: “SANCHEZ, VAL alleited- road building Lagoraation

wateh he had put on an overlay which wai. pacaed. by v/2 Cent oo
a) SAS Reports). - SANCHEZ had tevited. vw es Oriente Provinea
a ‘with. in in the neor future to gee: sone of to projects. ,

Reluctantly we instructed: v/2 to tell W/L to turn. down the
invitation on ‘grounds of aut ‘headth but vo ‘Leave the way open :

for a similar ireitatioan in the ‘future, It aT) thought - that

this waa ‘best until we sould aasene LOGETHOV' a Anterest in. tho
VASLOUCHES,. v/2 alse passed the war nasise wy had aseigned: to

' hie principaleontacts and a diagram of: the Brazilian Baha say

ineluding’ weasurements of tha. ‘out batlding wate DI UBALDO. had

. : = éiecussed with V/2 in Mazieo City relating to ‘kts possible use.
| -@8 a dead drop. A peuphlet egtitled, Liat af Exookia and
" Eaourts of cuban Hoxoan Trade Eakerneinea, ‘also wae passed,

(Sent to $AS/Reports.) fh khat of neas pasood shewed mumbero
and some other data on elise passdsigei's which had daparted

Cuba in tvo Cubana flighbi to Brasil ily he purpose of picking
wp the Cubsen sports tean in Brazil (aunt to 45/28),

3 .
SECRET

rn

fe



--- Page 6 ---
14-0000

_ Bet when” Wt on. 20 May, fron. 0700 - 0900 hours,

= LOGUTNOV's sudden and fairly intensiqw tultivat
‘had just this. effect.) The third ant we Lika

SECRET.

be On 19 Kay DI WALDO returned ‘to achtagton, DORENOSS

wi. was aiven the JEyuAY sterile phone. oF ‘ae told that aul .

Locutnov's. ayptoaeh (the ‘traces’ fron Headquertere had otal. Rot | ,

"bean received), In our opinba thore ware threo possibilities

aad tro of thea’ vere unlikely. Piret, LOGUTNOY" 9 approach

- gould be an kanoceat ene and be merely for the purpooe of

oatabliohing a friendship, ‘ah @xtension of “ete thought would ,

. be: the poosipiticy of tia Anteresthig in dagecting. Given. the

— 4ga* ‘difference ‘in the’ tye: coupled, and weighting, other faatoro,,
this was considered’ walikely. Tha sesond: paso biltty: ‘Ae that a
: the: Soviets: have ‘bean alerted, posoibly ‘by W/itG open coda

cable to Fintand; ‘to cha stouaigs posatble invelvescat with

"eho Awericans. This also Ae. unlikely for hail | thas ‘bam the ease

the Isse thing the Soviets would wish to de vould be to alert.

. the SLOUCHES to the faee thet thoy wenn andor eusptcton and

4
therefore bring - about a “eutAn thelr nutivitiees |

ponstbiliey®
ks thee the Sovieta ara. cultivating: wit Wor: ‘uss | aga penetration

-of the Brostitan Babs say. v/2 acgepttue rhe ane officer's:

seer cemasee|

ve” (this: “meeting, _



--- Page 7 ---
14-0000

. wae told. thet finel guidance -on this: mateor,
. at Py subsequent, eseting to be held tn the afternoon after
 DORENOSE, had received ‘thé Headquarters traces me an cussion

SECRET

assenemant es valid apd in keeping with her.own theughts. She

then went: to the couuntcatlons. :
- 6, .Whea the Subject atated that hor - busband was. imable

to > bring out either the pads or hig tastrustioas oa how to use
the pads watoh had been given hin ia New York, 42 wae decided

... to issue two, redwond size OTPts eoncealed in a shaving bie.
- Bf t instructicns oa the ‘Was of the Grp would be pasned by

BARKER in Heweo . Chty. 8ko was told that BARKER would ‘ba in

thé ‘lebty. of. tha: ‘Hilten Wot in Mexico City at 0730 oa “23 Hay.

_ When they ‘have’ recogalzed each other abe should: follow hin! froa

“ ehe Hotel. If BARZER ts ueable to make che eontect he toto
_ telephone her later ia tho dey woing. eha: nema, BETO, Subject was

tela thee we were. imable ‘éo cone ee aa ‘yet, with am extended _

dus lecerphona act wtiteh oho hod requested, but this would: be:

“available for “che. ‘next eontect. jeter tn tha oumner.

Te, - Toward the ‘end of the mosting, Subject passed tanae

: ‘Lattons ‘aha hed wade of voted given her’ y ‘W/L Waibh he balleved-
6 be of Amcelligenea’ intevest.: iThay ara; ' tnalnded 08 Attacheent

A). Ungortumetely, DOREEOSE waa nasble to, woview thasa reports
with her but sha was puirsunded Bi tata over Pisnish Language ,
motea and tho carbea sopy of w/a latter to hia eubassador
(a tvanelation ef whieh is Ageaghesat 3). | fhe C/O requested
the sana of a. pereon in Helsing! Whe weald have reason to write

to ¥/1 but who Le not doing oo at Ayo presens fine, She gove-
{_ re

SECRET

would be- given her” "



--- Page 8 ---
: _ mailed in Neloiakt, ‘and esténsibly, core ‘troa. this. .petecn.”
; “Sabjoue ‘etated that sha would depart Nieut by Guest Atrlines:
. on "22 May 1963. The woeting waa conducted hurriedly ‘and

: her ‘coapanion,: : : 7

“‘pORROSa. was able: to sentact ‘her and ‘a brio meating was hold”

‘at 2100 hours. Ie wae at thie scoting that tnetructions were -
: Sivan V/2 to tighten up on their socurity letting the dangers

; of adie-surved llance and the necesalty tor’ "great. eare. when.
: matling the letters: oat. Fes hex’ bouetit,, KUBARK security io
° ‘dealing wwieb, het cise wea eughasized, she Baa alse tastructed
. te react with disbelief naabined with. indignation ae a recruit.
- ment’ pitenh waa made to ‘elther ef chess. She waa aleo- urged not

° SECRET

the nase of V/l's aunt, Kaiss RAIXKONEN, She waa told thst some
of ‘the. “tneaating sf “in the future, would bei written in. Finnish,

necessarily d¢d concihuded at 9s00 hours. - ‘Blane were msde ‘for

- the Subject to return for. a ‘brief contast with DORENOSS between
1430 snd 1600 house after finding Boag exeusa to get away ‘fiom

a: Subject waz ‘wniabie to wreak away froa her companion |

in ‘time to make the scheduled sasting and when ehe telephoned yoy
; to g0- notify BORENOSE sha was errensously {ntonsée by the hotel."

desk thet DORENOSE bed cheghed ous. ‘Akeer, sone difftoulty,.

to inesurage. further soeink eantaek ‘with. the. LOGUTWOR' a re
hopes that LOGUIROV would lege interest, She was aévised that

her daughter should be enivuraged to Liave Moseow Lf tha
:

_ SECRET

, ; i

ad
H

}

t

1
“4



--- Page 9 ---
14-0000

a Lavelvenent with, opvors. “on the masseetey
- te heve us advise har on how: best. to deal with her problea, _

“Seecbs # sho has, otasa Seen” pag'd “by the ‘Sovietas when asked.

“fokye, Sha mentioned, shat another TAR. secretary ctatinod ts.
Moseou named” SALAH end: the ‘Consular, Agia 1 Howse were ‘sequatneancas. .

* daughter ‘phe had proaioed to eske her. daughter ‘to Tokyo te See
_ viele Kev bey friend, This waa coup ligated however becouse this |
: would tafuriate w/t who 4s streagly against. ‘the daughter sarrying

en

’ Bragiitan Mabacecéar, te: sransfertad in late fall. If thio does,
- not. conte. off, hen fz. visite: het daughter. 1h the fall ‘oha should ;
ateasyts under sane pretax to ‘have ‘tier daughter leave. Rusotes i .

‘yer: dough

¥/2 was concerned about” her daughter bocausé her daughtér had ||
‘Bot socially ‘with an GoACTD. offser in Hoseow nemed Richard

atest other eontacts: of her. Aaughter'a. ta Moscow: ohs stated

that her daughter B30. in ‘Love: with, saa of ‘the VAR abasay .
aécrotarics whe had” lege Hoseow and was presently asoigned in

toe

. Also 8 sceretary ae ‘the Henican’ ‘Pobassy naiaed ‘aeando cawtu._ shy

She menticned that during ber scheduled fel viett to eee her’

q

@ Hoales, Subject eas given 950. to off-set tank fares, tha.

gost of sn. antenna, and fer.good will, . The meeting | was eone © i po

t
‘eluded at 2107 vhen Hrs, DE “SILVA was sehodulod to get out :

of the bathtub. Two other names of possible interest vera

she was vary fortunate .



--- Page 10 ---
14-0000

ry

os

om

6



--- Page 11 ---
14-00000 -
- i

bee pee ae -SEORET |

ratsed by ¥/2. during the contact, Ela BONEARALA, @ Finnish .

( fecidle etudene tn Havens and'a rabid Comumtot esd Joho RETTI,.  °

‘an Bagitsh. mattonal met by W/2 Aa: ‘Mexico! “Chey. RETTt, “a writer |
ter the. *Hecnonise® ‘ged aa | emp le ve “of tho! pac. waa énce meriéd 7 nt
‘toa Fina, BETTI vas being adsigned. is Havens, Hie: adérose “
"4m Naxteo City: F.0, 1642 Hexteo City 1, Haxteo..: Telephona

| gambar, 4-52025, oo

3
a ”
i
i
- - ete f
i. i
a i
a
iy ‘
- - Dots
1
i :
: '
!
‘ 10 '
eo .



--- Page 12 ---
ewe

aedeieeseee neeurdeanicnne

ate

cree

er rel aera

SCT eae tance

eel, Slee ane ncn .

engineer oto dtecussing. Procurement ‘of:

‘example Cataptllar,: with a factory in Europe, the, ep-re parte ‘are
. Bent to Fast Germany and from there to! Cuba, oe os -

AUN oe ae
Se

‘de lor Paros, 7 re Y .

~ or Cuban equivalent) menber,

Prio, approached GAMPOA'S mother in Miami on BMav Stating that |
" Nefore she departed the country -he would give her the name .of A

. Cuban assnctate, of Prio +

European diplomats ard ar that lurcheon ie would purnose that the

\

1) Source: Planes Noguerae Pirero Caubsou ree not indicated),

Spare parts fron Fapland® area sent to Monterey (Merten, ‘then th
Yucatan and after rhat to Isles Materas and from there the Cuben

ELsherman take them to the Tsle of Piness 0 Oe

“y
\

2. ‘Soiree? Francisca’ Sancheg,. Cihan road construetion | ‘

lacement. parts. for- his. .
for 7

equipriant' stated, 1f che Amerteans have: va ‘gubstAtary factor ;

\ 3, “Source: Blanca’ - The headquarters of the Russ tans is
in ni tunnel at 36th Street, No, 62 on the corner of Street 39, .
4 has wa. entrances, one from the Fiver. and. the ather from. the

house’ of Me Je Dhar, . re

a Source: “Blanc - There ta a tuehia’ ‘On in San Antonio j

i

3, Source, Blanca - A former Watteasl Assembly cho» Note!

They Nadrazo,” stated that rhe refugee” 7

ship. that were to. Florida on 29 Apa carried two fovernrent agente, .

Jase Tiaz tel cojo) and bi wi fe Yolanda: ,Claneros, whose adéresa, 7

is Now. 7416 Avenué 15. _— ae : :
et yeh

the private. aéeretary’ "of forrer President:

“6 orlando. Puente,

ho” 1s. in y mich trouble And wants ‘asvlien

in the Brazilian Emba says be, mo a . oe
7, Source: YASLOUCH/1 ~ on 4 May Sduarda Corana, Chief of
the’ Occidental Furopean Countries Cffice stated to SLOLCH/T that he |

planned in the vear future to give a luncheon for the Northern

Northern countries put on an exposition in Cuba covering each countries

eultural and econoemte achieverents. . - og nt

SECRET .

Oey BER ser Banrartagesin seip oantig ecpasi

a Ferevnrys ene j

|
Hl
Hl

