
--- Page 1 ---
‘iets 10073-10279

gE 2025 eae UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 22 |

! aa Se ACTOS
. re l.
eis
waowes '

See woeree

Lx |. INDexiec PegumerD
ONLY QUALIFIED ux
CAN JUDGE INDE AC,
FROM 3
seat of Station | [Toxyok!>~ ||

MICROFILM
pee eBay uipASHA REDTOP — Beheiren and the Four U.S. Navy Deserters
ACTION REQUIRED = REFERENCES —~
OKO J72.63
(6-3

As noted in reference, forwarded herewith is a copy of the sub-
- | ject memorandum .

Please ‘note that the information in the memorandun
Paragraph B. 4. b) is particularly sensitive and should only be
given’ proper ly restricted dissemination.

a Af bap)
. . Mark J. LIDGERWOOL
- ATTACHMENT .

Memo dtd 27 Nov. 67 a vn Le

os Distribution ;
ige® - C/SB Div w/l.cy attach.
“'.. 1 = C/FE w/1 cy attach - to
1- C/MOMUSE/1CG w/1 attach

RETURN TO CIA
“ ~paskgound Use Only
Do Not: Reproduce -

CASHTICATION RW

Jaw wAPDET CE Oa oe.

Be Bue ct

DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER

FITA-53626 _

CROSS REFERENCE TO °

DEC 6


--- Page 2 ---
14-00000

- Rospectabre Intellectuat ¥ront:  Follewin funda~
: mental Communist principles for mass movenent nig (better .
, than the JCP itself follows these tenets), the ex~JCP .
. organizers of BEEEIREN kept themselves in’ the background

‘and lined up a number of prominent Japanese: progressive >. *.
. dntellectuais and leftist cultured persons to front for .
BEHEIREN. The choice of ODA Hakoto, ex-Fulbrighter and _
popular young novelist, to b@ the chief front man ~- Chair-..
_man - was an extremoly lucky stroke for BEHEIREN. ODA has we
‘taken to this grand-standing, front work like a duck to.
_ water. It has given him a chance to give unbridled vent ‘to ae
. bis own latent anti-American foolings, puffed him up to the : :
extent that he has been dubbed “the emperor’ by other BEHEIREN -:
activists, and given him at long last an ideological mission = =:
to pursue. YOSHIKAWA has performed magnificently in feeding |
ODA's ege needs and in infusing and indoctrinnating ODA se ..._
that his words and actions take on sufficiently virulen’
anti-American overtones. GDA hus served another vital .

have been identified as active BEHBIREN supporters | or sympa~ ne
thizers.) : .

: Oriantantionat Development: In its 2. 1/2 ‘year history,
BEERTAEN has not appreciably changed its organizational format, -.
although it has moved its office three tines and modified its.
mame even oftener. BEHESREN is not a “mass organization", be~ *
‘cause it has had no sizeable popular backing to the present -
: time. Its hard core, secretariat organization is rum by =. —
: YOSHIBAWA and his lieutenants. Its public image, inteliectual
: front is led by ODA, and given body by a-score of like-minded
“intellectual friends of ODA and YOSHIKAGA, who form the loose
‘ body of BEHEIREN's activist leadership... Under this BEMEIREN ;
. deadership superstructure lies a paltry base of only several
hundred BEHSIREN “rank-and-flie“:supporters, mostly young ©: —
Japanese students. Organizationalily, BEHEIREN has no formal ©
* membership system, so its base of supporters is fluid and not. -
- precisely measurzble.: However, the base support for BEHEIREN =:
has definitely been on the upswing during 1967, and made such. -
notable strides during the past summer that JCP Headquarters ci
officials finally felt constrained to note with concern.thet = |)
BESEIREN was beginning to drain off a growing number of. ‘prom.
gressive youth who otherwise would have been absorbed into.
the JCP's own youth movement. SBEERIREN leaders have tried to .-.:’.
help this growth along by setting up a youth section, calling ae
it "Young BEHSIREN." SEERIREN's imaginative actions and .

. publicity-conscious programs have been responsibie for. its -

~ recent growth, and this period of rowth, seens be now on



--- Page 3 ---
14-000

the verge of really pieking v up speed and 1 ‘momentura: _ “a
of its role in the case of the four deserting montun he a result L
has reaped bountiful publicity, has succeeded in touching a Ts
-delicate Japanese. public nerve of sympathy. and pacifism, open— aon
ing a f£loadgate of support for BEHEIREN from all over Japan.
‘When this case fades from the limelight, it is still most .

-likely that a fair percentage of current wave of popular — ae
support for BEHEIREN will solid rmanent mass backing, /
.giving or the first tine, a a
support its future activities,

&. Activities and Accom Lishnents: -BEBRIREN has engaged
in a number of propaganda actions, ad participated in inter-
national anti-Vietnam War activities. It has tried to co- >.
operate with certain front activities in Japan controlled by
‘the JCP, most notably the Japan Committee to Investigate War -.
Crimes in Vietnam activities, which cuiminated in the Tokyo § .
‘Court of last Atigust, but has been soundly and rudely rebuffed
‘by the JCP.. In spite of this, BEHEIREN has churned along at.
its own pace, with a continuing series of anti~Vietnan war :
actions, most of them related in some way to the American - ~ os
“pacifist movement. In this regard, BEHEIREN has succeeded in. |
‘cornering a virtual monopoly on Japanese contacts with the U.S.
‘pacifist movements, and has effectually capitalized on this to
promote its own action program. The case of the four deserting
sailors, while an-spparent lucky windfall for BEHEIREN, only =...
points up the fact that BEBEIREN, through past organizational
work and promotional activities, was “johnny~on-the-spot",
ready and capable (unique in Japan in this regard) to take ©

the bali and run with it. BENEIREN ran all the way in this

case and scored its most notable success since it was organized.’
. Attachment 2 is a listing of BESRIREN's more notable activities | oe
since its founding. Attachment 3 is a partinl listing of . 2
‘American and other foreign persons known to have beon ain.
contact with or. cooperated with BERET

7 * The ‘Case of the Four Sailor Doserters and BEHETREN.

le "How it Started; “The consensus of all ‘available overt:

* medin material, with no recorded dissent, indicates that the
‘four sailors voluntarily left their ship, went AWOL, and ended |
up wallowing around Tokyo's hippie-land.: Precisely what personal :
grievances prompted the four to embark on this mis-adventure is ioe
not yet known. But, up to this point, the four could fairly be ~
eategorized as misguided youngsters, gone astray in a foreign |
:Iand, and due to get slapped back in line with traditional.

- Navy justice when they finally decided to stop the fan and go .
back to the (PRPs So far, this made their « canes far fron | :

BEB RET.



--- Page 4 ---
14-00000

~~

woe laet : pa : ot .
. | How It Becere an Incident: But instead of returning to
‘epeir stip of their ovn volition or being apprekended by, the
Shore Patrol, the four unde contact with BSHEIREN lenders.
Acein, press reports indicate that this was just a coincidence,
© pre-planning by the four to contact BEEEIREN,

‘that. thore was n P| ; 2
thore are no available overt nor ‘covert reports that indicate
otherwise.'; But, once the BEHEIREN people’ made contact, they .
recognized the potential inmedintely and: moved fast for the
x4ll. (Attachment 4 fig a Youiuri Newspaper clipping, 22 Nov-
enber 1967, that is both a representative and comprehensive -
account of this phase of the case. Even if this article :
should contain some minor inaccuracies, the hasic line seexs
factual and bas not been challenged eleewhere.)  . are

See. 3 OS BEMBYREN Takes Over:°* When the four made contact with
PBEREIREN, it suddeniy became an entirely different baligaxc. .
BEHSIREN had everything needed to capitslize on this: veteran
activist leaders who ara experienced enough to recognize the :
windfall that had come their way; an apparatus that could .-
provide hiding places fox the four; long standing liaison.
= contacts with Soviet Embassy officials for use in pienting |
* exit from Japan; solid conta reliable American... :
pacifists with whom the bona fides of the four sailors could ..
be checked; money and organization to capitalize on the .. . °
propaganda potential (such as preparing a movie film for the
initial BEHEIREN press conference announcing the desertion, .
prepared more likely than not by BEHEIHEN stalwart EUEO: =.
Eeinosyke, an independent film producer) and English speaking
activists capable of sympathizing, encouraging, soothing, or |
agitating the four young sailors, so that there would be no -- °.
turning back. ce eb ue ahah ‘

woe- 4, ~ The BEBEIREN Apparatus At Work: While many of the’. =...
snail pieces of this puzzle, which would put the whole case in’.
proper detailed chronological order and eliminate speculation  ™-
on minor points, are still missing, enough is known now, °°.
through overt and covert sources, that the picture of PEHEIREN's
adept handling of this case shines through clearly. The follow-
ing elements, al11 part of the BEHEIREN apparatus, make up the . -

bulk ef the picture: alee eh p os

When BEHEIREN got hold of the four on ~~

eget a) Hide-out: | :
ut'26 October, they had to be hiden out for the approximate. ..

two week period until their exit from Japan could be arranged...
This presented BEHEIREN no great logistical problem. A number
of the RESEIREN activist leaders have homes vell suited to —.
harboring fugitives. For example, BEHEINEN activist leader |

“4 has a2 villa hidden avay in Chignsaki, which
was used on the night of 12 September for a meeting of about .
20 top BSEEIREN leaders, and which would be highly suitable.

SECRET



--- Page 5 ---
14-00000

: for hiding the four deserters. Other private.d _
‘ lenging: to PEXEIREN leaders and loyal ae
_SBroughout both the Kanto and Kansai sreas. :

=) BENEIREN/Soviet. Linison: PEDEIREN Secretary Genera
“ POSHIEANA has maintained periodic contact with Soviet ay
officials for years. BEESIQEN Chairman ODA hss met Soviet
Peace Committee officials in Moscow. ~The exact means of how.
‘this Jiaison wags accomplished in this case ig precisely Lnown_
‘(from & covert phone tap on the Soviet Embassy's line; <A full
ranscript. is available of two phone callsfmade on Z
first by Brian © Chief Press Attache Nikolay V._
“ Yasilyevich, and second by YOSINHAWA to First Secretary ;
Sergey D. Anisimov, urgently requesting a private mecting ;
later that day to discuss “an extremely important, extrencly:
delicate matter", without doubt the cass. of the four sailors.

we ° ed. BEREIRIN/U. S. Pacifist Liaison: BENEIREN contacted: a
Dartmouth’ ‘University professor Ernest P. Young, who Zlew to °.-:
Japan on & November, apparently helped BEEEIREN leadexs check. - .”
_ out the bona fides of the deserters, and returned to the U.S. —
on 12 November, (Attachment 5 is.tho translation of a Sankel- 7
Shinbuc article, dated 21 November, reporting an interview as
_ with Young, giving his version of his role dn this case. -:

; 5. Esca to Yoscow: - “The four deserters turned up ine:
_mozcow on 20 lovember. The press has speculated widely and . a
“gnaninously that the four left Japan on the Soviet passenger =.
ship Baikal on 11 November. Again, there is no dissenting =...
opinion; overt nor covert. The only mystery concerning this
final phase of the Japanese portion of this case concerns the |
- mechanics of how the four boarded the Baikal and who assisted.” |
ain this maneauver. . But with the sailing of the Batkal fren ~
Yokohana, BEHBIREN coupleted its most highly successful and .

. beautifully exeeuted activity in its 2 1/2 year history. Not
only did BEBEIREN smear the American Government's image in |. .
Japan, not only did BEMEIREN gain a vast amount of priceless -
; _ publicity that will swell the ranks of its supporters and be
' dnvalusble dn future activitios, but BESEIREN doubtlessly -
“even made a profit, financially, on this low budget operstion
= donations are still pouring into’ BEERIREN Headquarters from :
all over Japan to “help and protect U.S. deserters”.



--- Page 6 ---
14-00000

i Active DEERIREN Supporters or Syepathizers,

.. YOSHIKAWA Yuichi Counemnen Secretary General) - ~ foruer scp

-momber. a

ODA wakoto (esneines Che tras) - . ‘popular novelist
: RATRO Hen ~~ Akatagava prize winning ‘novelist

. KUBO Keinosuke - ~ ‘fil producer and Sirector.

. aSuRuUT Shunsuke - Doshisha University professor. .

. TSURUMY Kazuko ~ sister of Shunsuke (thoir father is the ‘ate a
: “_Bailosopher, Yusuke)».

EURUYAUA, Youo - igh school toacher.

¥OTO tehs: oO “ex-JCP (tried to ‘travel to U.S. to represent ;
’ BEEEIREN at October 21 demonstrations this year, but was.
denied. a visa to enter the a. s.)

: YAUADA f Ats ~ ex-ICP.

EUKUDA ‘Yoshiyuid. ~ playeriter. :
ptt hoes nl

. +) TOAINAGA Ichiro - _ cartoonist.
FUKASAEU Witsusada ~ ‘professor:
. © AWAZT Eiyosht - - - graphic designer
‘TAKADO Kaname - - Christien leader.
: YOSHIDA Biju - - - film director.
“UMIHARA Shun - m writers
7 " HASEIEOTO Mineo = Buddhist priest.
8. HORTA Yoshie - - aovelist.

Goro Hiroyukt - ~ ‘Scientist.
_ KOWABARA Takeo - - ~ profeaner at t Byoto Uaiversity



--- Page 7 ---
MATSUMOTO Ichiju
le”. FUEUTCHE Setsuo ™

e
at

“ axpo Sawer. cra Hido, EGAWA Taku, FUJII Kittatsa,
~ Baniyy Ichiro, ‘BOSHINO Yasusebure, ICEIE: Saburo, IKBYAUA Suro,
ISHIDA Takeshi, RANAI Yoshiko, EASAT Seiichi, ere
KATO Shuichi, KAZAMA Michitaro, MATSUURA a KIDOKORS ) asa, :
XATAROSI Satosht, KOBAYASHI Shoichiro, KOMATSU Sakyo, © aes

: KOBAYASEI Toni, KONO Osanu (Shu), KURODA Hidetoshi, | MARDYAMA ,
OO
Masao, MIDORIKAWA ‘Toru, MIZUSAWA Yana, HORITART Ichiro,: = : ;
KUCHAKD Saikyo, HURAMATSU Hiro, HISHLO SHIO Noboru, Noxon Koichi, ©
ocosnt Teruo, OTSUKOISY Yoshiko, ‘SERIZAWA Tae, SEI Bae
SHINMERA Takeshi, SHISHIDO Hiroshi, SUGIURA Hitsuo, SUGIYAMA -
Tatsusara, SUZUKL Masahira, ‘TARBUCHE Yoshitono, WADA Ragahisa,
YAMADA Munenitsu, YAMADA | Toshio, YAMAGUCHE Kosaku, YAMANESHY |
Biichi jichi, YASUDA Takeshi, YOSHINO Gonzabure, YOSHIVARA Koichiro,.
ORAKOTO Taro, MATSUMOTO Seicho, Br Rokusuke, 1ZUHT Taka, _
. AWAYA Noriko »_KATO Yoshiro, SHIROAMA Saburo, TAEABASHI -
_ Taketono, ODAGIRI Hideo, ORUMA Minoru, SANG Kenji, SUZUEI
a Michinilo, KUBATA =e SHINGHARA Selei, MARUYAMA unio,

SECRET



--- Page 8 ---
14-00000

commer: Although ‘not eocorded here, many of the above ‘persons
“edly BLS  ex-JCP seubars,



--- Page 9 ---
1. Neguiar once~per-sionth demonstrations at a public ‘park in|
okyO, consisting « of anti~Anerican Bpseckhes aad tellowed by street ©
arches. a ‘

ee aS am all night Tv “teach-in"* with BSHEIREN activist leadors, oe
elong with special guest, U. S. pacifist Carl Oglesby (Chairman of.
- the ‘Students. for a Democratic Society. > TTT. ;

3. A full page advertisenent in the New York Tines as Novenber
1965), Lollowed by another full page ad in the Washington Post: co
G April 1967) » appealing to Americans to stop the war ia Vietnan. a
ae AL ‘Meet in Conference ef Two Rations for ‘Peace in Vietnam," "
held in Tokyo in August 1966, and attended by BEHEIREN activists and
seven U.S, pacifist leaders {including Dave Dellinger), and ebservers
. fron ‘France, ‘England, Canada, the USSR, Pakistan, and Hongolia. Se

SO BLS A mass. necting in Tokyo ‘in ‘Cctober 1966, guest speakers of
which were Brench pacizists, Jean-Paul Sartre and Sizone de. Beauvoir, .

os Be Nationwide tours of Japan for Lectures and peace rails ies for
such anti-Vietunn war pacifists as Professor Howard Zinn and the late
A. 3, Muste of the United States, Claude > Bourdet of France , end Thich
/ Nhat Hanh of South Vietnam, By .

a Te. "A mass meeting ‘tn Tokyo in January 1967, sponsored
‘BSHEIREN and featuring U.5. folic singer and pacifist Joan Baez.
. : re

a A continuing progran of ‘direct distribution of panphicts to |
U.S. troces stationed in Japan, and those coming to ‘Japan, on: warships,
and for rest or hospitalization fron Vietnaz. ;

9.” : ‘Participation by ‘two BEREIREN activist: leaders (Kyoto
‘ University professor KUWABARA Takeo and Iaternationzl House stafzer
: TSURDUZ Yosbibeyules » t&king advantage of a trip to the U.S..to attead =
8 Hon-political Japan-Anerica Congress on Cultural ProbicmsY in. -. -
nti-Vietnam war Speech railie: Ons Ttmouth =.
University in early Nay. 1967,. followed by an unsuccessful attempt :
*0 dnvit @ Cassius Clay to visit sapan on “bebalt of ‘BEESIREN..

Continuing efforts to bring, to Japan for a nat somuide



--- Page 10 ---
14-00000

G0 our on pohalf of BSHSTREE, § Soviet: poet Yevgeni Yovtush onke,.
dort ‘that has not yet reached fruition but “Is ver! BB+ co

‘yy Participation in the Stockhola duly 1967 “Gorld Conference :

Yeetnan,” by sending two BENEERER activist leaders as delegates.

7 ° ee Le
12." Cooperation ‘with the U.S. Quakers,”  pacifists, and Earle

ynolds in sending the yacht “Phoenix” with medical aid, first to.

ae iphong, then on a second trip in the Fall of 1967, secking but

yailing to. find jandfaii. to deliver medical aid to. e2thor North or

3. " Attenpted, ’ “put ‘failod due to ‘GrabiLty 4 to optain v. ‘Ss. visa,
* go send a BEBEIREN activist leader (sure ichiyo} to the U.S. ta a
participate in the 21 October 1967 snti-Vietnam War ‘denoastrations. o -

i Currently carrying out: a “fund raising campaign ta send an
aid ship to North Vietnam. In this, aud other activities, DEHEIREN -
leaders are maintaining ever closer liaison contact with their: ; :
counterparts abroad, such as the French “Conite' Vietnan Rational] oS
-Iin an effort to generate public support for this aid ship :
~ raising ceupaign, BEOEIREN succeeded in issuing a public appeal,

under the endorsing signatures of Tokyo Governor = eee ang
Yokohana Mayor ASUKATA Tehior as + Wold as the suas uteliectuals | a

os Assisted ‘and abetted ‘the defection to. the USSR of four. :
American sailors from the U.S. Navy carrier Intrepid. Following this .
success, BEMEIREN's most effective activity to date, BEEEINEN leaders |
are organizing a permanent “underground railway” ef Japanese inteli~ -

ectuals cho will volunteer their hones as possible “say stops" for |.
. military ¢ Seserters that BENS IREN now hopes to

other details, see rrokyo intelligence reporting
11547, 31 Hay 1966 . -
I2046, 14 October 1866
12680, 10 May 1967.
12851, 5 July 1967 °° :
13681, & September 1967
23154, 27 Septenber 1967
LS, 03 22 November 1967
A180, (63 Bs}6700,- 11 daly 1967



--- Page 11 ---
14-00000

“ATTACHMENT 3.

ae Staughton Lynd (ex-Yale professor) ©
"Norman Batier (novelist)
° Dave Dellinger (Editor of Liberation)
Hovard Zinn ‘@oston a professor)

Donald Keyes (National Connitten ‘for a , Sane
: clear Policy os

David 1 cReynolda (Chairman, War * Resister
a League)

Ae J. Euste > (now deceased)
aelie Davidson -
Bradford Lyttle.

Guise) Quentin Bassett (Students for a Democratic
my Society) - :



--- Page 12 ---
:. Ira Norris (Paris expatriate)
_
Otto Waisan “Ghonetic, Yew York city peace activist)

Barbara and Earle Reynolds. (divorced but separately

— ective dong- time residents
an Japan).

. Willdas I R. ‘Christensen “(on Auericen pacifist drifter,
who gave BEEEIREN its first:
expericonce in the ssummer of
1666 in exploiting for prce-
‘paganda in Japan, and then in
_arranging the onward journcy
of an Amcrican who wanted to ~
defect to the USSE) - :

* Brian Vietoria (head-shaved pacifist ‘and "converted" rf
Buddhist priest, Known to be in .

regular contact with the. Soviet.
Enbassy in Tokyo) -

ne. wildowby fou, phonetic, - "*chie? of the Qqueker
nme Peace Action movement in the u. 8°). <

An unidentified “American of Jspanese descent, fron
; Hawaii ’ who dis- currently a student at Waseda University!

‘Kosaku Yamaguchi (reportedly born: ‘in U.S., present | ;

eee a RGERN Reet itizenship status unclear} (formerly
23 & professor at Komoyana University
.4n Osaka, but has been teachin, at the~

znia in Berke ley

Faiz Ahned Faiz, Pakistan ne
a

Gabita Muslepov,. USSR .
——


--- Page 13 ---
14-00000

FEGUE tT @

ae .

‘Francis Marcel an, ‘weance (Comite Vietnam °
~ . National) »

. Soan-Paul Sartre and Simone ‘de Beniuvolr, | France
eae re TT
Thich Nhat” Hanh, South Vietnam

; This ‘is not, by any ‘means, a complete listing, 20:
/ does it necessarily list BEBSIREN's most important
-aetivist contacts abroad. But this dist is re~

 presentative in showing the breadth of BEHZIREN:

. idieison abroad, particularly with the American
"new left".

 SEGRET —



--- Page 14 ---
-The four deserters who made a dramatic tele-
Vision a; . ave’ ‘left. Japan irregularly
on November 11 for the Far. East

See et Not Worrie;

Practicalis
t appeared -
unconcerned, Naitp said. . on”
He said ‘the deserters” ap.
- €njoyed hippie. life,
cheap “Japanese food
such as ‘udon
thelr Englis ) i

. t ‘and shochu. °
ay. -- The. Behe: .'. He said rv Americans

japan, and
-by ” th ,
. military!
Tr, Yo.

hoped *t4

} sta
Japa e:. Beheiren

reould no: Pel: them todo 50,

‘Bafley. and" Lind
Baril, "39 eee
aria, “Airman
Prentice - Crates -w,"' Anderson, ta
20—went - aroun y
Naito. gaid..
_ Naito” said“he
indner ‘stay.
OuBe in i



--- Page 15 ---
Went’ to Tokyo and Tried to Dissuade Them;

" Frebably Escaped fron Japan on, the 12th or the 13th _

“ Giew York, ’ November’ 20, Cormespondent Tadashi ONODERA "Professor" —
= Erne: a of Dartmouth College in the U.S:, ‘consented to ‘an ‘interview
‘with. this. ‘reporter on the question of the four’ American seamen who deserted .
from the U.S. aircraft carrier Intrepid. At the interview held on the 19th,”
Professor -YOUNG clarified that the.: :Peace for Vietnam Association: ‘(Beheiren,
with Makoto ODA acting as its ‘vepresentative) | contacted an anti-war organiza
. tion in: the U.S., and at this, Professor YOUNG hurriedly visited Tokyo, and |

“and 10th; tried to persuade ‘then to return. “In, regard. to ‘the pres ¢
abouts - Of these four Semen . he. made ‘the oeeertby. statement’ “that “those

mrcteleons” Beheiven ‘contacted “pavia DEXCINGER, "a a iacifist activist’
vin the U.S., asking him to "send someone to Japan to hear the stories of
ythe four seamen-and announce them in the U.S." I have been in Japan ‘tw.

During that’ time, I became friends with Beheiren representative’ ODA’ and

other intellectuals in Japan. It was for these reasons that I-was given.

: :.I personally have’ never, parti ipatec ely in the -”
ome so far ;

ne

I arrived. in Haneda on n November. 8, and met the four seamen
on the Sth and the.10th... The place of interview was in.an apartment house’
«in Tokyo, but I cannot say. at. this time where’ that apartment, house was and ~
cwho owned it,..However, on both days, I ‘talked - fully with. these. four seamen

efor more than three hours. on, each occasion (according to an investigation -

toward the evening of the 8th, and stayed at Hotel. ‘Tanakanwa’ ‘Sn shiba,
Hinato~ Us until: ‘the: + mowndng oF the. > Anth) « 7

professor: - “the desertion’ was. = completely the ‘decision. of these four
persons. . It seems that ‘the .four ‘seamen decided not to veturn. to the ship,
“34.When the Intrepid - ‘entered, Yokosuka Port on October 175: and they 1 were per- -*.
y mitted to go ashore for rest for one week, . My impression.on meeting these‘

;.four seamen was that they were, definitely not ‘deserting for the purpose of ee

th self-advertisement .or that they... were giving false reasons. I am convinced .
‘ ‘that Shey, deserted i meally, out of doubt. about. the Nietnan ware *

On the ‘night of ‘the 23rd, two ‘days before ‘the intrepid .
“.was:due ‘to.sail, the four went to Shinjuku, and told the people whom they |
"met at a bar they happened to visit, that "we ave fed up with war." ‘The .
.. Japanese who heard them sympathized with them,: and. at’ one time, the four ‘
lived with some hippies (according ‘to this paper's investigations, they -
' dnelude Mr, K., a student of Tokyo University's Liberal Arts Department,”
: and Vanguard ¢ artist Ae, who gather at ; Fugetsudo in a Shinjuku. ). Finally » a



--- Page 16 ---
ney were taken'to Beliatven by a student ‘who spoke English ‘(according to:
‘this paper's nay eens hiaae this was ur. S., a Waseda University student)

: ty ‘purpose in visiting Japan ‘was to ‘dissuade -the, four.

I explained to. them what the results of their desertion would be. I even’
told them that they would never agein be permitted to stand on American soi.
heir fatherland,*. At the time I met- -them -it was: still. at.a. stage, where
hey. would only receive alight punishment , :

aying that: they "had migsed their ship.
iva; “end my Persuasion had: "20 » oFectS

rt ascertained ‘that: point ‘too. "However, they firmly denied :
act of their having. been forced, saying that they had voluataril:

intention to desert, and if 8, in what form this: should be made.
‘Where are ‘the four seamen. nov, ana where are they planning to go?

: “Professor: 7 am » certain that the four’ Of “them iwere ‘still in Japan, ‘
up “until the lith, the day I left for home, * However, they already knew.
‘fully well. that it was not possible for them to obtain asylum in Japan

hey even said that "we will probably have to: go to some third nation, .

hich is neutral." (The public security authorities judge that the four -

eamen left Japan immediately after Mr. YOUNG's persuasion, and consider that
, they, probably were smuggled out of Japan:after the lOth,-and before the ©

am evening -Of the 18th, when: _-Beheiren, announced their ‘désertion. ata press

". gonference, .- However, Mr. YOUNG says ‘that the four seamen were in ‘Japan up.
until the night of the llth... Therefore, the, possibility .is strong that they

were, smuggled out of Japan. by. -ship ‘between the “night of; the. ith end the .

‘professor nee ‘the films were. ‘publicly shown there was bigt cxcitenest,
with rows and rows: of television and; press cameramen. I thought T would be = :

home, but. so, far, I have only, been, questioned duce - by: the. Navy.'s, Intelligence
Section, about the icireumstances. y It, seems that: “American, authorities con-"

oo ki certain. “television 2 ceed: asked , the mother: £ one of
the four’ men about her son's. Life... : This mother, was oh ech -perplexed,


