
--- Page 1 ---
124-10179-10217| | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |

a?

SECRET

: . ats
Memorandum to Mr, W.R. Wannaitl
Re: Samuel Adason Jaffe ;
105~28333 ; a

Soviet sescctorL'sennz] AY sevice that. Jaffe was
xecruited by the KGB, in about 1962 while he wag in Moscow,
through his relationship with a Soviet female. / Soviet de-
fector "Shamrock" has confirmed that Jaffe was approached but
does not believe the approach y yas_successful JeJaiie reported
to the New York Office in 1963 what he interpreted as a recruit-
ment effort, and he was extensively reinterviewed in 1969 ;

; concerning his association with KGB officers in Moscow. [inex
is no information in Jaffets file that he was ever reported on
by Col. Penkovskiy, as Jaffe reportedly has claime During
the interviews with Jaffe, he denied any overt act helpful
to the KGB, although he. admitted a continuing relationship with
several KGB officers. Both the New York and Washington Field
Offices came to the conclusion that Jaffe was a KGB agent while
in Hoscow, but that there was doubt as to whether he continue
in that role after he was expelled.

Our relations with Jaffe were tenpered py]'Samny' 0)
allegation, and Bureau Agents in contact with him were circum
spect in any dealings with him thereafter. Jaffe very likely
detected a change in the Agents' attitude which accounts for
his statement that he felt his relationship with them had
cooled off.

ted

There is no evidence contained in Jaffe's file that
either New York or Washington Field or the Bureau has ever taiden
any action which would affect Jaffe's livelihood. Following
his return from Hong Kong, Jaffe told his handling Agents that
he was experiencing difficulty in finding a job. He several
times mentioned his concern that tis association with the FBI
might be the reason. On each occasion, he was assurcd that
the FBI had never divulged his confidential relationship and
would not do so any time in the future.y

; Jaffe's file does disclose that during an interview
with Washington Ficld Agents in 1969, he said that he had
learned frcm a British Incelligence contact in Hong Kong t.
is recall from that city was caused byfhis refusal to ‘coop
vate with GIA, ef alro relited that he later’ mentioned “this
t

t

“a CIA contact Bn Yashington who responded that. the Brit.

. CONTENUED ~ OVER
; SECRET

~2-



--- Page 2 ---
et
ad

{ ACTION:

| Un UNC

SECRET

SECRET

Memorandum to Mr. W. R. Wannall
Re: Samuel Adason Jaffe
1058-28333

wt

Intelligence representative “had no right to tell you this."
CiAvhas informed us that they did have contacts with Jaffe,
while he was in Hong Kong and that he reported on Communist.

“Chinese of interest to the Agonoydde Tis file also records
that Jaffe told New York Agents in~1969 that a recently pub- .
lished book on the Council of Foreign Relations descvibed
him as having a subversive background. He was also described [in -
the book as being a member of the American League for Peace and
Democracy. Jaffe connected the appearance of this book with
his then recent recall fron Hong Kong by ABC,

That this memorandum be. referred to the SENSTUDY
project in view of probable inquiries from SSCIO.y

CS YR ye

J .

we
noe

Subd
SECRET

~3-


