
--- Page 1 ---
a = ~
124-10185-10099)- [2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992

HEMORANDUN FOR: Executive Director/Comptroller

| VIA $ Acting Deputy Director for Plans

SUBJECT :. Agency Sunport to the U.S. Secret Service

| _ (USSS) fer National Remocratic (16-14 July
j- : 4972) and National Republican (21-24 August
rs - 1972) Conventions . _

a ‘1. This memorandum is for the information of the Executive
| + Ddyector/Comptroller. .
2. Authorization for CIA sunpot rt to the U.S. Secret Service
for the fenocratic and Renublicen National Conventions is can-
‘tained in a mecorandua of 7 Anril 1272 fron Chief, CI Staff to
the eC] which was concurred in by the ADUP and approved by the
“PCI on 10 April 1972 (copy attached).

. JFK O)(B)
. 3, On 13 Arril 1572 the[cos, Wi/} lash net with the Miard
USSS represedtative and Mir. “lastrovito ef USSS beadguarters to

discuss preliminary planning for (Station Wy Wand] sunnort to the

USSS vrior ta asicoct Coi¥eniions, imoly Anvil Us72
fiat a C/TI/LENfuet with ‘rr. Hastrovito at Us adovarter

> to Inpleacnat the prelininary plomming agreed upon in "Gand an

‘ to determine the extent of Headquarters suppert required by: the

USSS, . -

a

4, The basic asreenent cutually concurred in by the USSS
and Hicadquarters representatives provided that:

| a) Va, (Station vit/HSant) would conduct nase traces. on
all Cubans of interest to the USSS,

- be. CIA Headquarters would conduct name traces on:
all other forcign bora persons of interest to the USSS.

ce. CIA would keen the USSS informed of any events
in the Caritkean and Latin American areas that would
have any bearing on the USSS protective mission during
the convention periods. This would include briefings
on Cuda and Cuban policies toward the United States. and
On activities of Cuban intellicence operations which
could affect the security of the conventions.

2 008%

JFK.


--- Page 2 ---
ravi §. On 27 Avril 1972 a meeting was held at a buffer office

i

sFKO) ;
76 (station wipiani}is in dally contact with the USSsS in)
: Miani, Utilizincbuifer office -AS\a-Beetine site when necessary. The
ye location of (Station wH/iiani bas net been revealed to

yy) the USSS. - (Station is located sone 1d oeried| nal ‘buffer office.) | yeeayks)

6 . @ .
d. Coverage of Latin American exile groups in the
United States would bs the Tesponsinility of the FR
since CIA had coased the extensive coverage fornerly
targeted against these gzroups since it was now considered
an internal security function, -

¢

of (Station wu/‘iani os with the USSS Chief of Comsaunica~-
tlofs, Staticn -persoancl and a Headquarters representative, It
Was.agreed that ane traces we Guld ne handled by Piani security
fFicld office courier from the LESS tower office until the Ves
established communications links fron their comnand nost in
convention center, at which tine trace requests vould be sent
from the comsand post to uSSS headquarters and rglayed to CIA
Neadquarters.: Cubaa nage traces, are relayed ‘to [st tation wis:
by the Signal Center and non-Cuban traces are conducted bby
Replics to USSS requests on non-Cukans are coordinated wit

(CL/SC.] jreeyem

w
SEONG, [Station iy/!
[about five minutes é
secure and nearby nme

nijhas arranned the rental of a safehcuse
H coavention center] which will provide a
ing..site for USSS and Agency perscunal,

This. safchouse will available just prior to and during both gree
conventions.. A Headquarters officer will T2Y(fo “ianiljpricr to
the conventions and reszain until the couventions adjourn to

assist the Station in providing the sepport descrited in paragray
four above. -

i
Yr.
c
h

ae
a
oO:
c
ae
&

Additionally, the (ian Sccurity Field G£fice raintains nornal
liaison with the Jocal USSS siiami unit.

8. The Staticn understands pat no personnel will be present
at the convention hall, trat th will not rrovide any ce yUinmoent
unique to the Agency, nor will it provide the use of any other
facilities other than the saiehouse described in paragraph six,

Cha

. tad ay : : i
ORan: 1



--- Page 3 ---
rs . é.., ‘1973

SUBJECT: Request for Information on Sensitive Activities
-You will recall that in Fiscal Years 1971 and 1972,

I believe,. Agency funds were made available to the FBI.

" These funds may still be possibly held in a special
account for that use. This is one of the areas where
TSD has been very much involved. Chuck Briggs would
have the details as this was handled through the Executive,
Director's office and of course Angleton would have
‘additional information.

Signed

PeaN-h -

Chief
Missions and Programs Staff

(7

GREE


--- Page 4 ---
J .
ws 7 ae - 8 May 1973
a : . ~ . :
MEMORANDUM FOR : | Deputy Director for.Operations .
SUBJECT : Areas of Possible Embarrassment

to the Agency

‘

1, Sometime in the spring or early summer of 1971, Mr. John
Dean levied the requirement on the Agency for information relating to
the Investors Overseas Service (IOS). The original request was
non-specific but it gradually emerged that Dean was concerned with
the possible adverse publicity that might develop regarding the
_ President's nephew, who was employed by IOS.

2. There were multiple channels from the White House to the
Agency on this subject: ; ;

a, Presumably Haldeman and/or Ehrlichman to Director
Helms, © ,

a b. Someone (unnamed) in the White House to the DDCI,

General Cushman (sce attached telephone conversation),
Note that Ehrlichman is mentioned, and

ce. John Dean to the CI Staff, These various channels
‘ were sorted out in time and six reports were passed by
the CI Staff to Mr. Fred Fielding for Mr, John Dean.

3, The telephone call of General Cushman's is of interest since
it gives the flaver of White House concern, It took several days to
uncover the fact that the White House interest centered on the involve-
_ ment of the President's nephew with IOS and possible adverse publicity,
‘The reports submitted to Dean's office were routine in nature and were
coordinated with the DCI, After a few months, interest in this sub-,
ject died down and we did not pursue it further, | :
. . i
4, Please return the attachments when they have served your
purpose, Ve

\
E2\IMPDET CL BY 05451?

OCT “oS or
ae | | : ONSS3
ct 1 i) s

.



--- Page 5 ---
7“

5. Ialso include a short note on the Intelligence Evaluation SRO) |
Committee and Staff prepared by|Richard Ober. | The original
meetings were held in the office of John Dean at the White House
and the principal sparkplug for this group activity was.the then
Assistant Attorney General for Internal Security, Robert Mardian
and then later his assistant, William Olsen. It is noted that Mr.
Mardian is now appearing before the Grand Jury andvit is always ~,
possible that he might draw in the Agency. .
JEKOSCR)
6. Before appointing{Ober|to the IES Staff as the Agency
representative, I had attended various inter-agency meetings pre-
sided over by Mardian, lexpressed the view to. Director Helms
that Mardian would require very careful handling due to his inex-
perience, Furthermore, Mardian was deeply involved in the split

.between Bill Sullivan and Mr. Hoover. Ona confidential basis

one or two senior FBI officials stated that Sullivan was secretly
passing files to Mardian without Mr. Hoover's permission, This
was one of the important reasons why Sullivan was dismissed from
the Bureau.

Sek. 2 en. | JEUNE)

; “Fames Angleton
Chief, Counter Intelligence Staff

Attachments (5)

SECRET =. 90584


--- Page 6 ---
MEMOPANDUM TOR: Deputy Director for Operations

SUBJECT / : Counter Intelligence Staff,
Police Group Activities SACMB)

” JeRUYB)’ JERGNS)

1. Counter Intellixence Staff, (Police Grous corps) | .
is responsible for Staff coordination within the Office
of the Deputy Director for Gperations for activities an
roqrans involyvina assistance(to forei-n nolice/security “WCC
forces for tie nurvose of exoloiting such activities and | °
programs for intellisence nurvoses .y
FRO) : ; .
‘2. CI pdjna aintains lisison with the Office of Public
Safety, Arches for international Taveiom sat (493/405)
ore and its training facility, the International P
Oe) (IPN). CrP aiso adm tinisters and suvorvises Project
WEN-I7- and its trainine romrieterv facility ,MEN-172
IEN-166  'n addition, cIppa coorcinates a joint OPS/ATD Tocivical
: Services Division, Ceatral In itellissace Anoney (TSU/C14
Technical Investigations Course. EO provices guidan
mee) and. counsel to the Area Nivisiofs in matters nertaining
yorto[nolice/s ecurity functions and activities .] Specific
gee” details of these functions are as follows: ;

JFe ays)

yrs) capieiiaison with OPS/AID and IPA is conducted on a
daily dasis and consists principally oft

AY exchange of information on IPA participants, some
of whom later attend IDEN+172 courses and who are
of interest to Agency components,

. B. arransing for inclusion of Anency sponsored partici-
. . pants in IPA/OPS/AID training programs,

C. arrancine for IPA/OPS/ATY briefings and tours for PK)
foreirn nolic o/securi ty renresenta ti ives sn vonsoree
by CIA Area Div isions, ah 00597

RRA wininht demas Bi) OG as pee cern
Rarietttrrer CL BY GSIc8 ra



--- Page 7 ---
D. obtaining biogranhic and assessment data.on
_ IPA/OPS/AID trainces,,.

—. providing ¢ general information pertaining to
police/security organizations, activities, equip-
ment, and personalities requested by Agency .
ope rating components ,

F,_ coordinating the Agener's narticination in t?
Tecinical Iavostications Course dosinned ‘to
Faniliaricze the trainees vith the technique
! . required to nronerly investirate terrorist
_\ activities wherein explosives have been utilized,

Ge obtaining OPS/AIN cover for CIA personnel to serve. .
; abroad. At one time as many as 59 CIA employees

SEK, |. were covered in Latin America, the Far East: and
) Africa, This total has heen reduced durins the

past several years to 19 servins in Thailand, *

H. arranging contact between Desk officers and OPS/AID
sponsored particiva nts.

Gancbion ot
IDEN-168
Ses pats

N-172 Training Academy is a comercial intermrise. pay
It was “incornorated under to laws of tre State of “arviand 37 '°
in 1952 and. conducts its: business in the District of OSG
~Golombia. It is engaged principally in training forcign Consus 7
(. police/security nersonnel under an overt contract wit . Seevis
OPS/ATD, “and selling police/securi ty eauinment to forcien : ©
police/securi ty personnel and orsanizations .IDEN-172 also Naa
provices special training prograns and bricfinas to :
foréicn nolice/security nersonnel of interest to Agency
operating divisions. It nrovides bioeramic and assessnen
data on trainees to country desks. Pecently YIDEN-172 has 7
n

PROJECT IDEN- 171 = PROPRIETARY IDEN-172— deca ee

ee acquired thd capability of providing training to foreig
| ¥ 4 f police/security personnel in VIP protective security
(O® | for Chiefs of State.
|

| “® CIA personnel under this cover will not he :replaced as Jrt
: such and all will be phased out by June 1974, (99)



--- Page 8 ---
ca? E SENT , ~

 crfpe coes not maintain direct contact or liaison
with any law enforcement organization, local or federal,

‘at home or. abroad When the need arises, such contact is
) Sonetines made on our behalf by OPS/AID or TEN-17 Wwithqut

divulgins Agency interest.) OPS/AID has such cont@éts

at home and abroad hecause of the nature of its activities
(training of foreiszn nojice/security personne] at home

and abroi’), and its Puslic Safety nrorrans around the .
world, IDEN-172 has such contacts at here - lecal and JFe was)
federal level - hecause its personnel are nersonally .

acquainted with law onforcesent of Sicers throusiout tae
United. States, Hembers of the (DEN-172 staff (not identified).
as CIA) have anpeared as suest lecturers at suci federal
institutions as the U.S. Park Police, IPA, the U.S,

Secret Service, and the U.S. Treasury inforcenent Division,

JPKEOYE)

3. In. addition to the liaison sentioned in the |
previous paracranh, (the Asency maintains Liaison in varying JFKOYE
degrees with foreign police/security organizations through
its field stations.) Tho existence and extent thereof,
hovever, is a decision to se nade by the Area “ivisioa,
and is not the responsibility of CI/?G. yer ww)

4, The CIA station as a member of the Country Tean in
Nontevideo, Uruguay, may have had some contact with an
Mitrione, “ho vas murcered by the Tunanaros., Jan litrione,
an experienced and respected Law enforcenent officer, was
a bona fide OPS/AID officer assianed to the AID mission
in Uruguay, and was never a CIA employee or agent.

Jaies #naleton
unter Intelligence Staff

peer boar Aan | SPECS)
Chief t

edad al
Q. “vet i
Bea


--- Page 9 ---
a

SUBJECT: The MHCHAQS Program ok

-1. The MHCHAOS program-is a worldwide program for
clandestine collection abroad of information on foreign
efforts to support/encourage/exploit/manipulate domestic

. U.S. extremism, cspecially by Cuba, Communist China,
-. North Vietnam, the Soviet Union, North Korea and the
Arab fedayeen. e ;

2; .-The MHCHAOS program has not and is not conduct-
ing efforts domestically for internal domestic collection
purposes.- Agency efforts arc foreign. Foreign-oriented
activity in the United States has been of two types:

a. Selected FBI domestic sources who travel
abroad in connection with their extremist activity
and/or affiliations to make contact with hostile
foreign powers or with forcign cxtremist groups
have been briefed and debricfed by Headquarters
officers. The bricfing has included appropriate

‘operational guidance, including defensive advice.

b. Americans with existing extremist ‘créden-

. tials have been assessed, recruited, tested and
dispatched abroad for PCS assignnents as contract
agents, primarily.sources offered for such use by
the FBI. When abroad they collect information re-

e sponsive to MICIHAOS program requirements, as well
as other Agency requirements. They are thus used
primarily for targeting against Cubans, Chinese Con-
munists, the North Vietnamese, etc., as their back-
ground and their particular access permits. It

‘ay should be noted that the MPTROIKA aspect of the

we eae MPLODESTAR project of the East Asia Division is

: similar to the MHCHAOS PROGRAM.

\

'3. As ‘indicated earlier, MHCHAOS is a foreign pro-
gram, conducted overseas, except for the limited activity
described above. The program.is and has been managed so
as to achieve the maximum feasible utilization of exist-
ing resources of the Operations Directorate. No assets

i :

OL OES Saal

—t

SENSTYT y iE a a“ e_Quaencr et oO dain
Mi VE 3 :
| SECRE iT vd,

Wahid iy TRNTTGL :
SENSITINA HUEL s
By BUG DS



--- Page 10 ---
SECRET,

6) oe CORPORATE COVER

“1. Central Cover Staff. (CCS) is responsible for the
placement of Agency operational personnel under the cover
of bona fide U.S, companies abroad and in the U.S, This
process involves the selection of companies; research on
their locations and key personnel; clearances; contacts”
with companies to solicit cooperation with the Agency; --
arrangements for integration of Agency personnel into the
companies, including letters of understanding; funding of
salaries, allowances and expenses; and, continuous. monitor
ing of each integrated case throughout the course of the
cover use. The overall objective is to match the individual
being placed, the company, and the location, in a manner
that will ensure achievement of the Agency purpose and pro~
tection of the company integrity.

: 2. Currently, there are 191 integrees for whom cover
is provided by 140 companies; 179 integrees are located in
47 foreign countrics and 12 are located in the United States,
To maintain this placement level, CCS personnel are’ re- :
searching and monitoring approximately 250 to ¢ 300 companies
at any given time,

3. To minimize the adverse consequences to a cooperating
company, and to preserve the Agency's onerational ecauity in
the event of exposure. of an individual under cover, it has
been established policy that no more than two individuals
would be furnished cover by the same company. . At the present
time this ratio is confined to upproximately 25% of the total
number of companies now being used and efforts are unde
way to effect further reductions toward the goal of one
individual per company.

4, In addition to the primary corporate cover function
described in: paragraph 1. above, CCS maintains continuing
contact with two U.S, car rental firms and two U.S, .credit
ecard firms for the purpose of obtaining backstopped credit
cards in alias for operational use in the United States and
abroad by Agency personnel. 42 such cards are now being
used by 34 individuals. ; :



--- Page 11 ---
DEVISED FACILITIES COVER

1. Central Cover Staff (CCS) maintains 311 back-
stopped notional facilities which were created to pro~
vide cover: for Agency personnel in the United States
and abroad and to provide an attribitable source for
Agency funds used in operations and requiring conceal-
ment of Agency or U.S, Government interest. The facilities
comprise 43 corporations providing personal status cover,
payrolling and tax attribution sources, and other miscel-
lanecous support such as title to property,‘ funding, ete.;
Gl sole-proprietoxships providing status and operational
cover, including payrolling and tax attribution; and 207
non-registered companies providing support for high risk
operational requirements, agents abroad, corporate reim-
bursements, and proprictary funding.

2. 224 Agency personnel engaged in operational
activitics are payrolled by the facilities, an essential
procedure permitting. the reporting of Agency salayrics with-
out documenting the Agency as the source, -

3. The facilities provide a capability for passing
Agency funds/to 30 Agency proprictaries and 97 bona fide
Ahies on a continuing basis, 225 bank accounts
Located in 3G banks throughout the United States -provid
the mechanisms for transmittal of these funds.

tetany
Vint



--- Page 12 ---
Tonite
wm OPTIONAL FORM NO. 10
dMAY 1962 EDITION

H s01g-100 -
. OSA GEN, REG, -NO. 27 . ,
( UNITED STATES G

4 Assoc. Dir. i,
\ M. ‘dum 1 - Mr. J. Cochran, Jr. ania
. 1- Mr, R. J. Gallagher ‘Asst. Die
\ emoranaum 1 - Mr. W..R. Wannall Admin,
. a Ci - Mr. W. 0. Crega: Sayeed
_DATE:. July 24, 1975 Files & Cem. —
1 - Mr. W. A. Branigan dont.
_ l- Mr. A. B. Fulton Inspactien —
1- Mr. J. G. Deegan Laboratory ——
~ 1- Mr. R. L. Shackelford ¢ beset Com, _
1- Mr. F, S, Putman Flen-& Eval. —
l= Mr. J. W. Redfield ". Teatning
1- Mr. T. J. McNiff Telophong. Re. —

Diroctor-Sec"y —

” My memorandum dated 7/23/75 captioned as above advised
you that this Bureau had received from Central Intelligence Agency, \
(CIA) 190 pages’ e% extracted from a 693-page document prepared by,” \
CIA citing instances wherein CIA believed some of its” activities \
may have exceeded its legal mandate. Some of the CIA activities
cited in this document dn¢eiude references to Buredt-operations of.
, an.extremely sensitive«nature and it was also noted that theSenate |
_ Select: “Committee ‘has " ‘had - ‘access to this document, It was. -recommended |
the. ‘respective Bureau Division ‘and/or Intelligence ‘Division. Section I
believed to have an interest.in the material contained. ‘therein-for_
“the. -purpose of fully identifying the subject matter and_ making. an~

assessment as to whether any compromise to this Bureau's operation
Cis—-involved, :

his is to advise that the following pages from the ‘docs
“ment ‘were furnished to the following Divisions. and/or Sections of

1 the Intelligence Division on the morning of 7/24/75 for the purpose
ESI of review, assessment, and recommendations, if any:

AG

“Raa.

my)

%:

General Investigative Division ~ Pages 107, 108, 111, 149-151, TA ;
155, 156, 158-161, 178, 180, <———
181, 296, 298, 301, 353 and 354

Laboratory Division - Pages 65-67, 113, 118, 119, 182, 202, 221,
222, and 234, (pages 238-240 and 248 were
furnished for information purposes as these
pages contained/ information -concerning
techniques used and/or developed by CIA

which may be of- interest), G x6)
Intelligence Division

88 |
Section CI~1 . Via a Lf 2 579 = 7H

Pages 23, 24, 28, 29, 70, 72, 73, "77, 136, 120-142,
298, 329, 582, 615, and 628, 3 JUL 311975

62-116395 , ‘

ee EET Cee

TJM:ekw (12) CONTINUED: - OVER ye
Rul : - Led

84 JUL3 1 1975



--- Page 13 ---
Memorandum to Mr, W. R. Wannall
RE: SENSTUDY 75
62-116395

Section CI-2
Pages 30 and 329

Section CI-3
Pages 26, 59-61, 282, 290, 292, 295, $10, 334, 361-363,

368, 371, 373, 376-379, 384, 385, 458, 468-470, 591-593,
and’ 615.

Section IS-1
Pages 188, 189, 283, 330

Section IS-2
; Pages 29, 30,171, 190, 191, 193, 194, 197, 198, 203,

330, and’ 482.

Section IS-3
Pages 521 and 549

a

Recipients of above pages were requested to respond to
above request by memorandum captioned as above to reach the
Senstudy Project, Room 4063. JEH by the afternoon of 7/28/75,:

ACTION: None. You will be advised of results of above requested
assessment. . :

Existence of the 693-pag Gtafdocument and the
AW information containe erein shou @ closely
A) guarded and disclosed only on a need—to-snow
q ‘“pasis.

assis.

Ar



--- Page 14 ---
we eh

; OY PROJECT MOSKINGBIRD  )

Project voctngsii] a telephone intercept activity, was conducted
between 12 March 1963 and.15 June 1963, and targeted two Washington-

‘based’ newsmen who, at the.time, had been publishing news articles
based on, and frequently quoting, classified materials of this Agency

| and others, including Top Secret and Special Intelligence.

N Telephone intercept connections were installed at the newmen's
office and at each of their homes, for a total of 3. The connections

were established with the assistance of a telephone company official

‘who responded to a personal request by the Director of Security, Col.
Sheffield Edwards. Col. Edwards' authority for the activity was Mra
SJohn-As McCone, Director of Central Intelligence. The latter conducted
the activity in coordination with the Attorney General (Mr, Robert Kennedy),
the Secretary of Defense (Mr. Robert McNamara), and the Director of

the Defense Intelligence Agency (Gen, Joseph Carroll). In addition to
Office ‘of Security. personnel directly involved in the intercepts and ~~
‘research of materials acquired therefrom,. only 3 other Agency)

‘Officials dre on record as witting of the activity: the Deputy Director
of-Central Intelligence (General Marshall S. Carter), the Ins pector—

| General {Lyman Kirkpatrick) and the General Counsel. (Mr. Lawrence
\=Houston). - . . aS —
he intercept activity was particularly productive in identifying con-
tacts of the newsmen, their method of operation and many of their sources

of information. For example, it was determined that during the period they
received data from 13 newsmen, 12 of whom were identified; 12 senators

and 6 members of Congress, all identified; 21 Congressional staff members,
of whom 11 were identified; 16 government employees, including a staff
member of the White House, members of the Vice President's office, an
Assistant Attorney General, and other well-placed individuals. A number

vof other sources were partially or tentatively identified, but-‘the short Span
_of the activity precluded positive identification, It was observed that through”
these contacts the newsmen actually received more classified and official
data than they could use, and passed some of the stories to other newsmen
for release, establishing that many "leaks" appearing under other by-lines
were actually from the sources of the target newsmen.

Since the termination n ofProject Mockinguird;}those materials related
it which were retained, have been maintained under strict security access

of two Office of Security professjonals.
A Me 375° YI 00:22

ENCLOSURE -

WARMING HOTT
SENSITIVE INTELLRGENCE SCLRTES
oun METUAAN IVE)

"SECRET Es oy



--- Page 15 ---
p . eel y : a =—— SEG +

SUBJECT: | Soviet Detector | ;

. re -
Sr A Soviet defector, | — . ;
‘defectéd to a representative of this Agency in
, -1964, The responsibility. for:
: his-exploitation was assigned to the then SR Division of
the Clandestine Service and he was brought to this country
. ; After initial interrogation by
« representatives of the SR Division, he was moved to a safe-
house in. . Maryland, . . where he :
was confined. and interrogated until 13 August 1965 when
_ he was moved to a specially constructed "jail" in a remote
\ wooded area ot] sSo1Ation] The SR Division was convinced
A NG that he was a Spdtched agent but even after a long
AK period of hostile interrogation was unable prove their -
, contention and he was confined at/ESOEATION n an effort
to convince him to "confess."

. This Office together with the Office of General
{\Mcounse1 became increasingly concerned with the illegality
of the Agency's position in handling a defector, under

these conditions for such a “the [bizeet of time. Strong

representations were made to the Director [(Mr. Helns]by
this Office, the Office of General Counsel, and the
Legislative Liaison Counsel, and on 27 October 19, the

o the Office of Security under the direction of the Députy
Director of Central Intelligence, then Admiral /Rufus Taylor

f The Soviet defector - was moved to a comfortable safehouse in
the Washington area and was interviewed under friendly,
ympathetic-conditions by his Security Case Officer, Mr
[Bruce Sole for more than a year. It soon became apparent
that the Sovief defector was bona fide and he was moved to
more comfortable surroundings with considerable freedom
’ of independent movement. and has continued to cooperate
fully with the Federal Bureau of Investigation and this
Office since that time. He has proven to be the most

\

"2 IMPDET
- [cL BY 000988: 000233

secre” a
EVES OLY |

‘

responsibility for his further handling was transferred



--- Page 16 ---
y SET |
» HS 6: vel 4

valuable and economical defector this Agency has ever

had and leads which were ignored by the SR Division were
explored.and.have resulted in the arrest and prosecution
of Soviet recruited agents — -in’ several
countries throughout the world. He currently is living
under an alias; secured a divorce from his Russian wife

and remarried an. American citizen. He is happy, relaxed,.

and appreciative of the treatment accorded him and states
“while I regret my years of incarceration, I have.
no. bitterness and now understand how it could happen."

00024.

SECRET
EVES @N1Y



--- Page 17 ---
SECRET
P Hsou 8 86@

I. SURVEILLANCES

- A. -SEBSTA

During the periods 1-20 February, 12 April- 7 May,.
i urveillance was conducted of

and 9-20 August 1971, a

J Wis Deborah’ Pitagerdidyf a former staff employee, and

Orlando Toro Nunez, a.Cuban national with whom

Miss Fitzgerald had become professionally and emo-

tionally involved. Surveillance was predicated upon

. |. information that Miss Fitzgerald had been seeking from

‘ employees information in Information Processing Division i
files, and that employees were visiting a. photographic i

studio operated by Miss Fitzgerald and Nunez in Fairfax

City, Virginia. In addition to physical surveillance,

one surreptitious entry of the photographic studio was

made, and an attempt to enter the apartment of Nunez

_ was aborted because of a door lock problem.

PARAGON

Pursuant to a “request from the CI Staff,
by the DCI, surveillances were conducted of Iden 69
and her associates at various times’ from May to September
» an acknowledged Latin American revolu-

ost 1971. ° Iden 69°
tionary, had long been a source of the WH Division and
had given. information regarding a plot to assassinate
Surveil=

rv kidnap Vice—President—Agnow and the BEE.

} dances] included coverage of the activities of Iden 69.
q lances] two visits to the United States, technical cover-
age of debriefings of her by WH Division. representatives

in New. York City, and surveillance, including mail cover- |
age, of several American citizens alleged to be part of j
the plot. Although most of the surveillance occurred in}
New York City, surveillance of one of the individuals :
nines extensive coverage of a commune inDetroit./. |
. te

pe . C. GELOTEX_I
I a At the direction of the DCI, a surveillance was con-
‘ducted of

Iden 180 of the Washington Post during

sey FO CEH na
1 a eves

"S00026

ES WY

v
“approved =:



--- Page 18 ---
SECHET |
! Yer] a
EVES OrLY é

: the vensaat October, 27 October-10 December 1971

: . and on 3 January 1972.. In addition to physical sur- \
veillance, an observation post was maintained in the
Statler Hilton Hotel where. observation could be main-
tained of the building housing his office. The sur-
veillance was designed to determine Iden 180 sources
of classified information of interest to the Agency

which had appeared in a number of his. columns

D. MUDHEN © . -_ _

At the direction of the DCI, surveillance was con- -

ducted of Jack Anderson and at various times his "leg |
/ men," Britt Hume, Leslie Whitten, and Joseph Spear, ‘
“ from 15 February to 12 April 1972. In addition to the
physical surveillance, an observation post was main-

tained in the Statler Hilton Hotel directly opposite

Anderson's office. The purpose of this surveillance

Was to attempt to determine Anderson's sources for

| highly classified Agency information appearing in his
\.. syndicated columns. : .

PE. BUEANE-

At the direction of the DCI, a surveillance was
conducted on Victor L. Marchetti from 23 March to
20 April 1972. The purpose of this surveillance was |
to determine his activities and contacts both with if
Agency employees and other individuals in regard to //
his proposed book and published magazine. articles ex-|
posing Agency operations, —

~ POLICE SUPPORT SS

A. During 1969, 1970, and 1971, on several occasions, .
the Intelligence Division of the Metropotitan. Police
Department was provided a communications system to
monitor major anti-Vietnam war demonstrations in the
" Washingtom area. This system consisted of a radio
receiver: and an Agent at the Intelligence Division
Headquarters and several automobiles from an Agency
Field Office equipped with radio receivers and trans-
mitters and manned bytwo Agency employees, as wéll asia mt
representative of the Intelligence Division, Metropolitan. ||»
Police Department. The benefit to the Agency was that |
the communications over this system were monitored at iH
the Headquarters Building to provide instant notice of
possible actions by the dissidents against Agency in-

Stallations. Lo
. Q00nY _.

segsey EVES SLY



--- Page 19 ---
~SEGET
p MBC @

B. During the period from 1968 to 1973, several

items of positive audio equipment consisting pri- \
marily of clandestine transmitters and touch-tone ;
dial recorders were loaned to the Metropotitan

Police Department, Fairfax-County —Virginia, Police
Department, Montgomery—County;—Marytand; Police

Department, New-York—CityRolice Department, and the
San-Franeisco,-Caiiformia, Police Department.

| GENERAL SUPPORT — —" —
“A. SREOINTER- .

]/- Since 1953, this office has operated a mail inter-

cept program of incoming and outgoing Russian mail
‘and, at various times, other selective mail at Kennedy
Airport in New York City. This operation included not-
only the photographing of envelopes. but also surrepti-
tious opening and photographing of selected items of
mail. The bulk of the take involved matters of inter-
nal security interest which was disseminated to the
Federal Bureau of Investigation. This program is now We
in a dormant state pending a decision as to whether
the operation will be continued or abolished. .

o AEEADEE

For several years the Office of Security has pro-
vided support to Russian. defector of |
|

|

interest to the CI Staff.. This support has consisted
of numerous things, including documentation for a change |
of identity ; "on three occasions. u

'C. REDFACE-—
In July 1970, this office made a surreptitious
entry of an office in Silver Spring, Maryland, occu-

pied by a former defector working under contract for |.
the Agency. ‘This involved by-passing a contact and

. 3 7
SEEPEF 00080

4

EVES ONLY . be



--- Page 20 ---
@® We ou | é OO

L.. \\

Ay /y “sonic alarm system, entering a vault, and entering ° \
(i '/ a safe within the vault. The purpose of the opera- ©

«| tion was to determine whether the individual had |
"any unauthorized classified information in his Dd
possession. ; . moe

D. BUREAU OF NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

In January 1971, the Director approved a request
from the Director, Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous
Drugs, to provide. covert recruitment and security
Clearance support to BNDD. This has been accomplished
through the medium of a proprietary of the Office of"
Security ; operating in
- Falls Church, Virginia. Support
includes covert recruitment, investigation, polygraph,
yb) medical clearance, and training. It has been divided
hi into three phases: (1) A CI operation to place indi-
J viduals in BNDD field offices to monitor any illegal
. -activities of other BNDD employees; (2) Recruitment
. : . of Chinese or Spanish speaking covert Agents; and (3)
q : Recruitment of an individual used as an Agent by BNDD
but actually employed by BNDD, although this fact is
known only to the Director and Chief Inspector, BNDD.
In this case, arrangements were made for all pay and.
other employee benefits to come fromC1A}on a reim-~}
bursable basis. a

E. {-KETTENS PROJECT)

) ‘As a result of a request from the Department of
, iy State,j/ approved by the bch this office has, since
AY October 1972, provided protection on a 24-hour basis
£\ . to two.sons. of a foreign leader who are attending school
in | the United States. This support includes

the financing of the protection and the detail to the:
Department of State of six armed Agents of this office
who are documented as State Department Office of Security
employees. . :

’ . i

BL AMBRRIMAG-

From February 1967 to November 1971, an
Office of Security proprietary, recruited and handled
several Agents for the purpose of covertly monitoring

SECRET 00029
EVES OLY SE



--- Page 21 ---
|

“SECRET
EVES 08%

y

dissident groups in the Washington area considered
to be potential threats to Agency personnel and

installations. One of these Agents so. successfully

penetrated one dissident group that the Agent was turned
‘over to the FBI for handling.

priate parts of the Agency and to certain outside _..__/'
Government agencies.

In addition, during
this period, the Office of Security field offices
were tasked with collecting available intelligence
on dissident groups. All such information was in-
cluded in a periodic report distributed to appro-

~~. .-:Several months ago, at the request of CI Staff,
“and with the approval of the DDP and the DCI, this

office arranged to move a sensitive defector out of
a European country via commercial transportation and

gain entry into the United States without leaving

any trace of his-true identity.

5
SECRET
EVES Gril

000390

\



--- Page 22 ---
, 7 .

vo ~ : " . May 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

SUBJECT: General: Office of Security Survey

&

1. At the Director's instruction, and with the concurrence
of the then DD/P, the Office of Security developed informants in
_RID to report on the activities of RID employees on whom security
questions had arisen. This program, which included upwards of a
dozen informants at its peak, has declined to its present level of
three, only one of whom is reporting regularly on matters of current
interest,

2. The principal object of Security's interest through this
informant is a female who was employed in RID for a number of years
until she resigned in 1969. Her resignation coincided with the initiation
of a security review on her by the Office of Security, but Security does
not know whether the employee was aware of this security review at
the time of her resignation.

3. Security's interest in this employee was occasioned by
reports that she had developed an increasingly intimate acquaintance
with a Cuban national. Reporting by one informant, who was also
being developed by the Cuban, suggested that the Cuban might have
an intelligence interest in the female, The same informant also sub-
sequently reported that the Cuban had numerous other contacts among
clerical and secretarial employees of the Agency. Among these
employees is one girl who works in a biographic section in SB Division,

4. Subsequent to her departure from the Agency, the ex-RID
employee entered into a common-law marital telationship with the .
Cuban and joined him as partner in a photographic business. In this ye
capacity she solicited business among CIA employees, especially /
those requiring passport photos. Recently, she and the Cuban sought
to'employ Security's informant in this business on a part-time basis.

. wo Q ,

00059

eo ~ -
ClENT . _ [eae CU BY een
ClikG ; bmn —

il



--- Page 23 ---
ayy

Qe. -8. The: -Office of Security has been running this operation for SS

5. Information on the background of the Cuban is fairly extensive,
, but it is inconclusive.gHe is known to have been a member of anti-
Castro organizations Mthis country. There are al§ reports that
his mother was imprisoned in Cuba at one time. There are other .
episodes in his life that suggest intelligence involvement on his part
with some hostile service, but this is not yet definitely established.

6. The Office of Security has had at times a second informant
in this case. His reporting has tended to coniirm reporting by the
principal informant.
a
7. There is conclusive evidence that the Cuban expressed
interest in certain 20] files in the Agency, and there aré good grounds,
for believing that the RID female employee delivered at least one such

‘file to the Cuban while she was stillin RID. There is also evidence
_ that the female employee in SB Division has continued in frequent

contact with her friend,. the ex-RID employee, and the Cuban. On
one occasion, she served as intermediary for contact instructions ;
from the Cuban to O/S's principal informant. The informant has no

' knowledge, however, of any other requirements that may have been

levied on or satisfied by the SB employee. Neither does he know of

. the extent of contacts by this couple with other Agency employees:

except social contacts, © :

over two years, in an effort to obtain conclusive | proof ofits intelli- | ~\\
gence nature. CI Staff has been kept informed. The FBI, which i
was informed of the case at an early stage, has declined to take re- a
sponsibility for it, on grounds that it concerns CIA's internal security.) fi
As a result, the Office ofSecurity has been inhibited in the actions }
it can take against the Cuban suspect. On the other hand, Security — /
has not taken any action against Agency employees for fear of com- Zp

promising the operation.J . te

. 9. It would appear to me that the Office of Security has dallied
with this case long enough. Apparently unable through positive measures
to resolve doubts about the case, O/S has followed, the course of watch-
ful waiting, hoping the Cuban would take precipitant action himself that
would give us the evidence we seek. In the meantime, our knowledge ,
of the relationship between the Cuban and the several other current
Agency employees with whom he is known to have contact continues



--- Page 24 ---
na

to be quite limited. Neither the Cuban nor his girlfriend have made a
any further approaches to Security's informant receztly, although he

+ continues to see the cially. Thus, there is slidgleason to believe
that further waiting will produce a-break in the case.

10. There are two courses open to the Office of Security now.

It can attempt to have the Agency employees known to be in contact
with the Cuban transferred to nonsensitive positions. This might
alert the Cuban to our penetration of the operation, particularly

since a plausible reason for transfer would be difficult to develop

for some of the persons involved, Alternatively, Security could
move overtly and charge the Agency employees with violation of the
security regulation requiring reporting of contacts with foreign
nationals. This would, of course, terminate the Office of Security's
_ operation. ; ; .

Il, One of these courses of action should be chosen promptly.
The possibility that the employee in SB Division may be passing ’
information on}-CLA's Soviet operationshis too great to warrant further
delay in moving against her. Moreover, it is possible that the Cuban
has current productive penetrations of RID. Thus, the risk of damage
to the Agency seems clearly to outweigh any. possible gains from
continuing this CI effort.

)

es

neeen 09064

coe oe
oe errred |



--- Page 25 ---
St dul)
o ¢@

_ OO, 9 May 1973

Tere pe wy
edo lialigcnal

MENORINDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Management & Services

SUBJECT . ? Press Allegations re Use of Agency
Polygraph, ony

oe This memorandum is for your information only
and confirms a Teport I made to you by telephone earlier
today. : ; a :

2. On 22 July 1971, an article was carried on
American preposals relative to the SALT talks in The New
York Times over the by-line of Iden 181. . It was
devastatingly accurate and contained direct quotes from
a Presidential advisory memorandum the White House had
sent to Mr. Gerard Smith, Director, Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency, a few days earlier. The President
was alleged to be furious with this unauthorized dis-
closure of classified information and directed a4 sweeping
investigation within the United States Government to
determine the source of the disclosure. Investigation
was conducted uncer the direction of Mr. Egil Krogh and
Mr. David Young, Staff Assistants to Mr. John Ehrlichman, a
Counsel | to the President for Domestic Affairs. ——

- “On the basis of investigations conducted by

i “State Security and Defense officials, four individuals-- 4

’ ‘one individual in the Department of Defense and three 4

. individuals in the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency-- f

were tabbed as leading suspects. Mr. Egil Krogh contacted |
me on 26 July 1971 and requested that we arrange to polygraph!
the three suspects in the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
and volunteered the information that the Federal Bureau of
Investigation would be asked to polygraph the one suspect

in the Department of Defense. ZA

ADSRISTRETNE ieatiaal US t uly

90065


--- Page 26 ---
to

jo bint canl Udi Ut

-4, I informed Mr. Krogh that from time to time
in matters involving the national security the Agency had -
detailed to Mr. G. Marvin Gentile, Director of State

. Security, a polygraph eperator and a polygraph machine for

his use in polygraphing State Department employees who
were recipients of allegaticns concerning their loyalty.

I emphasized that this procedure had the Director's
approval’ and that State clearly understood that the examin-
ation was their total responsibility. I further informed
him that this was the only way we could undertake to enter-
tain his request and that even then it would require the
specific approval of the Director. Mr. Krogh asked me to
obtain such approval and work out such arrangements with
Mr. Gentile.

S.° Later that same day, Mr. Krogh called Mr. Gentile
and inquired as to whether the arrangements had been made.
Mr. Gentile indicated they had and suggested that the sane
polygraph operator be used to examine the Defense suspect.

Mr. Krogh informed Mr. Gentile that he considered this an
excellent idea and that he would instruct Defense officials
to make their man available to Mr. Gentile for a polygraph
examination. :

6. The four individuals were Iden 182
of the Department of Defense and Iden 183
’ Iden 184 » and Iden 185 - of
the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency. The polygraph
examinations resulted in clearing the four men and the
results of the examinations were forwarded over my signature
to Mr. Gentile on 29 July 1971. A copy of my covering

Memorandum is attached.

7. ° Iden 186 ° , a staff writer for The
“Washington Post, in an article dated 3 September 19717,
Stated that a State Department spokesman had acknowledged
at a news briefing that agents of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation had polygraphed State Department employees
suspected of leaking information on the SALT talks in
July. Mr. John Edgar Hoover, then Director of the Federal


--- Page 27 ---
sos ADS Vests 8 arenes crete eres: yar
, nado aici civaie Hot Gil

. Bureau. of Investigation, denied this allegation: in a
letter to The Washingtcn Post and said that the. polygraph
examinations nad pecn concucted by another agency. -Specu-
lation centerec around the Agency, but after a day or so,
press speculation in this regard died away.

8. Iden 186 apparently has never been satisfied
and has been pressing Mr. Charles Bray, State Department
spokesman, for confirmation of Agency involvement. Mr.
Bray learned today that Iden 186 plans to use a press

- conference to be held at 2:00 p.m. this afternoon to press
this point further. Mr. Bray has been given guidance by
Mr. Gentile to avoid. confirmation but if this is impossible
he will indicate the examinations were conducted by State
Department Security officials utilizing an operator and

, a machine detailed to the Department for this purpose. I

do not know whether or not the fact that the government-wide
investigation was directed-by Mr. Egil Krogh is known to
Iden 186 but I suspect that it is and that this is the

reason why the matter has been raised again. Mr. David

Young was instrumental in pushing my office to conduct an

internal Agency investigation of this disclosure and the

White House was satisfied that no Agency employee was

the source.

Attachment

STATE atc Jeb

~ "00067

a a


--- Page 28 ---
SB rne-1973

MEMORANDUM FOR: Inspector General

SUBJECT : : Items in John Clarke Memorandum
to the Director of Central Intelligence,
- dated 9 May 1973

1, Two items in the attached memorandum had not =~
“previously been reported. The first: '-- Use of CIA funds - ~

| and facilities to acquire. U.S, real estate for.F BI and pro- 4
‘vision of technical equipments by NSA (MHDOZEN) for use a
against a common target in the U.S." , \ “

2. Ina follow-up meeting with Mr. Clarke, he advised |
i that involved here was the use of funds appropriatedfor CIA :
| being given to the FBI in cashiers checks for the purpose of
i buying an apartment building,” :
i . There was also

Agency help given in handling the purchase. Further, other a
CIA monies in cashiers checks were given to NSA who, with i

. some OTS assistance, was working on new gadgetry for the :
| surveillance. Mr, Clarke said he thought the only problem \
here was in the use.of funds, not in the operation. He thought

u the only source of additional information on this subject was

A Mr, ‘Ray Rocca of the DDO/CI Staff.

«

} : 3. The second item: '-- Use of CIA funds to help
“} State Department defer Presidential representational expenses
* of President Lyndon B,. Johnson's trip to Southeast Asia." 4
. 4
. 4, Mr. Clarke said the total amount. of money requested ,
- by State Department was $3,000,000 but that the Director would
j not agree to this amount. The Director did supply funds in
| those instances where some operational activity was involved or
\ could be inferred, i.e., crowd control, politicalaction influence
\ _ activity, etc. Mr. Clarke was not sure of the'amount of Agency

00070

 @RNN “T CUTS CU)
SEbHeT-EVES CHL



--- Page 29 ---
[roms emcee cece me

funds used. He fait that only Colonel White could supply

additional detail He said Senator Russell. af) Repre-
sentative Mahon were advised of this Agency activity but
asked not to be briefed in detail.

fbi wes 6 Relarks

Jobr-Giz-Richards.
_Inspector

Attachment

aa 0004
at , vi . .
SECPET-EYES GLY


--- Page 30 ---
. 9 May 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Central Intelligence. )

SUBJECT '. t Per your instructions

-

1, have no recollection of specific contacts with the |
Elisberg case, Watergate, or Young. Dick Helms' instructions
‘at the time regarding discussion of Hunt's previous employment
should be ‘a matter of record. . ~ :

2. Other activities of the Agency which could at some point
raise public questions should they be exposed and on which Bill
Colby is fully conversant are:

Heal =~ Clactivity of Dick Ober, DD/D.

‘ e© WFEBRINEY and MHMUTUGAL investments and
accumulation of Government capital.

Use of CIA funds and facilities to acquire U: S.
real estate for FBI and provision of technical °
equipments by NSA (MHDOZEN) for use against
a common target inthe U.S,

Use of CIA funds to help State Department defer
Presidential representational expenses of L.B. J.

' trip to SEA,
THUR)

nM,

Clarke Tho

00077

e.2: impoer ce ey LEML2.

EYES OWLY 7
SEGAET |



--- Page 31 ---
;

i
Or

* hero was in the use of funds, not in the operation. He thought

5S gine 1973

s

MEMCRANDUM FOR: Inspector General

tems: ; John Clare) 2rmorandum
to the Lirector of Central Intelligence,

dated 9 May 1973

1. Two items in the attached memorendy tm had not
7 previously been reported. The first: '"-- Use of CIA funds .
and facilities to acquire U. 5. real estate for FBI and pro-
vision of technical equiprnents by NSA (MHDOZEN) for .usé \
against a common target in the U.S." ‘

2 Ina follow-up meeting with Mr. Clarke, he advised
that involved here was the use of funds appropriatedfor CIA
being given to the FBI in cashiers checks for the purpose of
buying an apartment building
~ There was also
Agency help given in handling the purchase. Further, other
CIA monies in cashiers checks were given to NSA who, with
some OTS assistance, wa3 working on new gadgetry for the
surveillance, Mr, Clarke said he thought the only problem - -

the only source of additional information on this subject was
Mr. Ray Rocca of the DDO/CI Staff.

‘3. The second item: "-- Use of CIA funds to help
State Department defer Presidential representational expenses

_ of President Lyndon B, Johnson's trip to Southeast Asia."

4. Mr. Clarke said the total amount of money requested
by State Department was $3,000,000 but that the Director would

‘not agree to this amount, The Director did supply funds in

those instances where some operational activity was involved or
could be inferred, i.e., crowd control, politicayaction tnfluence
activity, etc. Mr. Clarke was not sure of the amount of Agency

00073

ernccr m9 en u
eee re TN TY
a a ere Mehl

Pn nnrtenieer , temamnt



--- Page 32 ---
MEMORANDUM FOR:

‘

. FBI referred to in para 1 is not shown
-in other documents in the Agency. It
has been kept very close with Ur. Yale,

“Mr, Magnusson, aind possibly Mr. Colby.
“All Files. have been purged.

00076
~~ (DATE)

REPLACES FORM 10-101

FORM KO
g lOL sarcn ear ge uses. .

a Aue $4
.

N

€ ”
7. . we ’
. se . N
man ;
SA " .
, 0 ,
, . ais
wi °
nn rs
can.
. e er : .


--- Page 33 ---
of Finance in a memorandum dated 17 Novembet 1971 to obli

sos . ) . ; @ 07 MAY 1973
Ww ”. "
. fh | |
MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Central
Deputy Director for Management and Services

Intelligence

VIA :
FROM : Director of Finance
SUBJECT - 3 Special Other Government Agency Activities i

1. Project MHDOZEN - Colonel White, Executive Director-

Comptroller, acting for the Director, authorized the Director i

gate |;
$2,700,000 for a sensitive domestic FBI operation and to i
disperse all or any part thereof in such manner as may be B
determined by the receiving agency and relayed to Finance by
the Chief,.CI Staff, DDP. This authorization was reaffirmed |
by Mr. William Colby 18 April 1972. This Project is still
active. :

2. %&PMEDCEY - Rental of office space in New York City
for National Security Agency at the request of Dr. Tordella,
Deputy Director/NSA and approved by Mr. Karamessines,
Deputy Director for Plans.

3. Detailees - The Agency has reimbursable.and non-
reimbursable agreements with the White House, Department of
Justice, Defense Agencies, etc., based on signed memoranda
between the Director of Personnel and the various Agencies.

4. Project TKOFOLD-- Reimbursement from Bureau of |
Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs for training of BNDD agents by

‘a domestic Agency Security proprietary.

: 5. Department of Justice - On 29 April 1971 the
Executive Director-Comptroiler authorized a payment of
$858,555.70 to the Department of Justice for negotiated
sensitive services. Details were kept in the Office of the

Deputy Director for Plans.
i.
‘ 7 : . : _ .

; e2 rupoer JP MN)A)
er. Y: [o0ss67.
poo .

 @rpnry pyre ev. (0007
' SEORET EYES GHLY sy Oo?

\


--- Page 34 ---
MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Management and Services

SUBJECT °; Special Report

‘1. This memorandum is in response to a request to
provide information on situations or associations that
might appear to be irregular on the surface.

AY 2. Details to the White House and Government Agencies ~
: a

g

ckgrounag: For many years the Central intelligence Agency nas
etailed employees to the immediate office of the White House
- per se and to components associated intimately with the immediate
office of the President such as the Council on International
Economic Policy and the President's Foreign Intelligence
Advisory Board. We have furnished secretaries, clerical .
employees and certain professional. employees on a reimbursable
and non-reimbursable basis. At the present time, we have no
Clericals or professionals assigned to the immediate White
House office, but we do have one young man detailed to their
Communications Section. There are detailees to PFIAB and CIEP.
I might point out that we had detailed to the White House as
late as the fall of 1970 couriers, telephone operators, a |
laborer assigned to the grounds and a graphics man who designed
invitations for State dinners. By October of 1970, more funds
were apparently available to run the White House and most of
our detailees were hired as bona fide White House employees.
‘CIA’is not the only Agency. furnishing the White House with
detailees. Levies have been made by this Administration and
others on Defense and State and other Government entities
whose employees have Top Secret. clearances.

. Professional officers have been and are at thé present
time assigned » the National Security Council and we have seven .
clericals on detail to NSC on a reimbursable basis.

In addition. to the above, we have technical specialists

detailed to NSA, an instructor at the National War College and
security officers detailed to the Department of State to

\

CONFIDERTIAL 2? poet cl By{-003935-)

Ve
oan


--- Page 35 ---
mold 2C),
' ,protect foreign vis ors, Recently [ John Hayg kas detailed -
* to the Secretary offhe Treasury along with mr other Agency

employees. We have even, in rare. instances, detailed our:
people to Congressional Staffs for short periods of. time.

-3. Details to the White House and Government Agencies -

Discussion: Details to NSC, the White House, SA and the

ational Nar College are probably quite cefensible., On the other
hand, there may be those who would question Agency employees
currently working at the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs
and Mr. Peter Petérson having an Agency employee as his
secretary when he was the Secretary of Commerce (she also made
a trip with him to Moscow), She is still with him in his
present assignment but we expect that she will report to NSC for
@ new detail sometime this month. Iden 112 served for
over ten years as Director of the Office of. Public Safety for
AID. This information has been kept "close to the vest' during
that entire period of time. He has been approved for disability
retirement and is presently on sick leave and will retire
automatically at the expiration of this leave.

Each detail of an Agency employee to the White House or
other Government agency has been carefully considered and
approval at a higher level obtained when professionals were
involved. ; ;

4. Project TWOFOLD: I believe the support we are
providing to Project TwOFrOLD is an activity that should be .
reported under your guidelines. Since this is an extremely

sensitive Project and the Office of Security is reporting on
it, I will not repeat the details in my memorandum. ; ;

$. Individuals Engaged in Domestic Activities: In.a more
_Zeneral sense, Contract Personnel Uivision prepares and executes
contracts with individuals engaged by the Agency to carry out
domestic activities. We also process Staff Agents who are
domestically assigned. None of these assignments are decided
in OP. I really have no way of knowing with any degree of
certainty what the specific duties of these individuals will be.

6. Arrangements with American Firms: - In the interest of
reporting "too much,” I would remind you that Contract Personnel
Division writes "agreements" with domestically based American
firms to provide cover. for Agency assets. The actual assign-
ments are overseas. The arrangements, however, are backstopped,
in the main, in the United States. .

a

- “99406


--- Page 36 ---
O ; . | ° é MAY 1973

45; a MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Central Intelligence

“THROUGH : Deputy Director for Management and Services

SUBJECT : Sensitive Activities Performed by the
; Office of Logistics

y t

1. This memorandum contains information for the Director
of Central Intelligence.

2. This memorandum is submitted pursuant to advice given
by the Deputy Director for Management and Services on 7 May
that Office Directors report on activities, either under their
cognizance or otherwise known to them, the nature of which
could possibly need explanation or justification when viewed
within the statutory responsibility and authority of the

|: Director of Central Intelligence. The responsibilities of the
' OFfice of Logistics (OL) are such that’in all matters herein

' reported, except two, the actions undertaken were at the re-
‘quest of another Agency component. We have prepared a brief

| description of each action involved and then have included the
' name of the sponsoring component. The substantive reason for
. the requests for action by this Office will have to be deter-
mined by inquiry to the designated sponsoring component.

_ ,.,3¢, Facts pertaining to both actions undertaken at the
initiative of this Office are as follows:

a. A covert procurement proprietary concern, dedi-
cated to the acquisition of firearms, ammunition, “and
related police-type equipment, is operated in Baltimore,
Maryland. It was organized in 1969, This proprietary

_is operated in order to give the Agency a capability to
obtain such materiel without associating the procurement
action with the United States Government. It is legally

.hecessary that the proprietary be licensed by both the
State and Federal-jurisdictions. Since it is located in
Maryland, it is appropriately licensed by the Maryland

; State Police to buy and sell firearms and ammunition,

EYES ONLY a
SECRET | et 3- me



--- Page 37 ---
Sensitive
Logistics

The Maryland State Police have been briefed on the Agency's
association with this proprietary and have assisted us in
obtaining the appropriate State license. Similarly, a
Federal license has been obtained for 'the proprietary
through an arrangement with the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco,
and Firearms of the Department of the Treasury. They, too,
have been briefed on the Agency's association with this
proprietary.

“SUBJECT:

stivities Performed by th Office of

‘

_ ..b.. Under Title 18, Chapter 2512 of.the U. S. Code
- (1968), the sale of electronic intelligence equipment is
prohibited except to Federal agencies, and state and local
law enforcement agencies. In essence, this law makes it
almost impossible to procure electronic intelligence
equipment in a covert manner so that no tie or relationship
to the United States Government is made. In order for the
Agency to covertly obtain.such eauipment and hide any
Government interest, the Covert Procurement Staff of the
Procurement Division: has relied on an established working
relationship witha U.S. firm. . This firm, a prominent
Supplier located in. Maryland, deals in a wide
range of law enforcement, police supplies, and equipment.
The Covert. Procurement. Staff has, had a relationship withan officer
“©. dn the firm for over 15 years. The officer agreed to
allow us to place orders through his corporation to major. .
suppliers of this equipment with a billing to #2 Agency national
t proprietary.There is an understanding that. if any. inauiry
is raised by the Department cf Justice, the firm's officer would
immediately call the Chief. of the Covert Procurement Staff
who would, through appropriate liaison channels, contact
the Department of Justice, identify the.Agencv's interest
in the procurement action, and clear the officer of any
‘ responsibility.. On 10 September 1971, there was an inquiry
about the proprietary .£ron_an FBI agent making a routine
investigation of. the officer's books. Through Office of
. Security liaison with the Department of Justice and the FBI,
os -.the agent was informed that it ; is an Agency
notional proprietary. This disclosure closed the inquiry
~ 50 and, since that time, there has been no further inquiry.
: . ‘-Most'of the DD/O area divisions from time to time submit
a requisitions to us to acquire [surveillance] equipment. The
i majority of the transactions are on behalf of the intelli-
gence service with whom liaison is conducted in various
foreign countries. By agreement between this Office and

4 .

a
EYES CeLY
, SECRER, vo. 00444



--- Page 38 ---
.

° 7. Contractu@MRelationship - USJPRS: e Agency
organization, USJPR&, has a contractual assocwation with

approximately 1,500 independent contractors and 45 contract
employees. These indivigquals are unwitting of the fact that
they really work for/CIAjin the performance of their domestic _
activities. [,USJPRS (United States Joint Publications Research’
Service)- is a part of FBIS._) They perform a translation service
of unclassified documents for the Government. The independent
contractors work in their ovn homes and are given assignments

as the need arises. The contract employees are "integrated"

into the Bureau of Standards and are located in Washington, D. Cy
They are paid and administered by the Bureau./ CIA freimburses

the Bureau. Their basic contracts of employmen nt are prepared

in Contract Personnel Division. ;

“8. Hunt Requests a Lockpicker: This is. a record of
External Employment Assistance sranch's action on a request
from Howard Hunt for a lockpicker who might be retiring or
resigning from the Agency.

Sometime in the spring of 1972, Iden 38 of EEAB
received a call from licward Hunt who asked Iden 38 1f he had 5
retiree or resignee who was accomplished at picking locks.

Iden 38 sent him a resume onbIhomas_Amatd@\who retired ond

‘31 July 19712. . Iden 38 did not document his EEAB record

to show the date of this exchange, but Mr. Thomas-Hester (who
also works in EEAB) opines ‘that it occurred sometime between
March and May 1972.

All of the above information 1 was reported to the Office
of Security on 4 October 1972 following the FBI's contact with
the Agency regarding Howard Hunt.

9, Resume Sent to McCord: Ross Lambert, a contract
employee who retired in September 1971, was a client of the
External Enployment Assistance Branch in his search for ' a job
after retirement. One of the leads given to Lambert was

. James McCord's security business. EEAB sent a resume to

McCord, but Lambert was not hired.

In mid-summer 1972, Mr. Lambert télephoned EEAB from *
Chicago. (He had a job there with the Halifax Security Co.
a lead provided by EEAB, but until this telephone call he had

\
1

CONFIDENTIAL “00407



--- Page 39 ---
s

not notified EEAB that he had the job and had moved from
the D.C. area.) Hegaid he had been visited@y a Special
Agent of the £81 wold Lanbert that his réWume had been
found among McCord's papers. The. Agent wanted to know if
Lambert had any connection with McCord. Lambert explained
how the resume got to McCord, After the Agent left him,
‘Lambert telephoned EEAB. “Mr. Nennedy of OP and Iden 29

OS were notified immediately. - . *

gid |

—_— .

Wand. ‘ull,
Harry B. Fisher
Director of Personnel

CONFIDENTIAL =. Ooze.

ee



--- Page 40 ---
.

15 May 1973

IRENA
Goth an wi dd gett

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Break-in at Identity 61

1. Information has been received from VH Division
which indicates that there was a break-in at - Identity 61

on the weekend of 13-14 May 1972. TheIden76 Desk

of WH Division has no knowledge of Bureau coverage at that
time.

2. I discussed the Iden 76 matter with Iden 66
of CI Staff (Red 1731), who advised that the FBI did
have coverage of Identity 61, _ and (the Agency sup-

“ported this operation. He. indicated that This was identified’

‘details on this if Mr. Colby requests it

‘[s/ Identity 10

Acting. Executive Officer.

—

RAT HINT TSR :
Pregl -E2 IMPDET
GES: vail nb a : CL BY 008246.

; Operation WUDCOR and he would be able tp provide additional

60

sper
hon ea.



--- Page 41 ---
MENORANDUY FOR:
“SUBJECT:

REFERENCE s

Deputy Director for
WH -Comaents on Jack Anderso
Sack Anderson's

Round Coluan of $
Rreak-ins Reflect uaterga

Operations

1. - WN Division has reviewed the referenced colunn
(copy attached) by Jack anderson and fiads that it con-
tains no new information. «To the best knowledge af the
Division, there is no foundation to the aliexa tion that
3. Howard Hunt wag enynaged on benalf of ii in bresxing
into Chilean diplomatic installations in Washington and
Hew York,

: po
. 2. Any connection between ITT and these break-ins
is purely conjectural and the colunn takes care to :

point this out.

, 3.

' Harold Yan
[ tive,

has told
‘Tiunt on this or
that Anderson wight

4 j coluan ‘and had ass
vy

Ui ts)
Gere cha

Attachment; As Stated

ARORAIED PAD PT ene {nny

Cia heaton Lh he

Gna yy
03 dur get

heed Hh. we, add

¥ hy we)

“Ho

ITT Latin American representa-

had no relationshin wii
matter. He had anticipatac
iy such a relationship.in bis

us that this was not true.

/s/ Identity 81

Chiet
Western Henisphere Division -
vu .

sae

vat. \
Gh BY O9LAI Ze



--- Page 42 ---
USSa-EPS -ORM 10T - ° . : —

Ny

- 6/70 . - ExcCUTIVE PROTECTIVE SERVICE
INCIDENT REPORT

An SERIAL (CASE) KUMBER

12, HOUA 43. OAY OF WELK

&. LOCATION (STAEEMROORES Si S. MATURE OF INCIDERT
(nation) |
{jo__1726 veanachunntts Ave A nive.N AL B.
fe. file BY: “47. nooaess
“ re . “ts orFice # .
Hernan Haverro : . 1705 Hamlet Street, SorinrLield, Vel. 765-1715
TIO, OFFICE ASSIGNED VVOATE 8 .

Sergeant Stevens’ E. Butler

| - Sergeant Riley M. Richardson
14.WITKESS . .

BRT eT

05-15. ™ OY T F €y)
15. ADGRESS V6. noME ee

H
. ; W/h . ao re Nh 4

18, WITRESS

24. OFFICE FroNE

N/A

G22 Forcipn Missi ssions Divisio.

. Control Cantor . ups “pdvise an ae that_a burclam:had_tskon nlece-at—lhe
Chancery of C of i1e,:+1735 lias a2¢ okey Avarua, Le, _sonebine betyveen 1AND_ hares an_

Friday, May 13, 1912, and on 0355 hours this date.

Borgeant Bae Piet shonin ard the undansigned were dispatched at sppraizes Lely

. hours in Cruiser j

i The undersicned vas edvised by Mr. arro, /érinistrative Ceurretgn
| * of the Prba sev of Cr. ae. t that the Ch hancery of Chile was cntered end al}
J wore ransacked. at this tire the method of enti o» itens ae is un
“Mr. Neva advises that he will. co contact the roreicn Kissions Division-tlateh Corrs? |
i “hen. datarsiuatie deter, A vation of niacing articles ic nade rr a a 22. Protos

O ves

{USE EPS FORM 102 + SUPPLEMENT FOS ASSITIONAL DETAILS)

MIDCLE

ADURESS

ATC OF BIRTH

RATISNAL:2*

LAST KAME FIRST MIDOLE ACORESS

42) Race $tx ee WEIGHT HAIR YES DATE OF GIRTH SOCIAL SECURITY NO. RATIGNALITT

25. ARREST PO 24, ARREST HO. 27, ARREST OFFICERANAME AND BOGE KO) 28. OATE OF PRREST 23. ag s

30. INCIDENT STATUS

ade oven a ¢Loseo ¢. O UNFoUKOLO bd. O cLesnco ay astEt”
3 REPORT Wh a) pe es 32. APPROVING OFFICIAL (SIGNATURE) OATE ae
: \ \ : Ont.
. Len gr 7, rah “Ady. oo.
1 flee C73 as De wth, oe? SA “\ vn VOried rary .
ae Lk 1b StLovens E. Putler Cantain Pote I. Manthos Eco
33. STATE DEPT. OFFICIAL ROTHEICE . . PATE: 34. USSS-19 CASE NO.

. N/A “8 3 HOUR: HA C 0376:

oer



--- Page 43 ---
- — a P hi " [te seaias (CASED ned
vt . . . ve .

Lo: : Fy'e7en
2. KATURE OF INCIOENT . 7 - 7
Burglary II —_ = . q ; e
peery tt
3. REPORTED BY: : [4 ADDRESS ; a
4
Hernan (29°T) Nevarro 605 Nanlet Street, Springfield
Te ADDITIGNAL OCTAILS OF INCISERT: | .
. a _ _ we ; ve

The following were previously on the scene: Sergeant Clifton 0. Gill, Badge # 1k7,

" MVP.D.C.,3D, and Officer Michael S. Kurdilla, Badge # 31794 HePeDsGe53D5 also M.P.E,C
Print Cruiser # 735. ,

ate s . oe . . .

S/A Michael F. tarps, USSS-PID (Foresgn Brench) » was notified.

.

. a °
a 4 - .
. .
won . . we
i} 5 7 0 . ‘
- <7 l. . .
- At * ?
. . . se
. . . . .
. i - ~ . .
> . o- .
~. ' .
—_—
. . —_
. - . ; . .
: . ; . : + .
. . . . . ©
Jan ay .. a : . :
uw .

FIRST |

AN

MIDDLE,

| ACORESS *

WEIGHT |

RACE 1 sex | BEIGHT 1

RATIONALITY

KAIR | eres | - DATE OF BIRTH| ©. SOCIAL SECURITY HO.,

FIRST \ MIDOLE \

AGORESS | :

RACE}. SEX. | RUIGHT |. WELGKT | Kain | eves |

. DATE OF BIRTH | SOCIAL SECURITY HO, RATIGNALEY

9. ARREST PO | 10, ARREST XO, |

Ul, ARREST OFFICER (NAME & BADGE KO.)

od 12, DATE 13, Hey?

\

$4, CUSAENT CASE DISPOSTION \

nybres J ef crosep “| ¢.[Dexroundeo | D.E]ctEaRco By aRResT {

AS. USSS-ID CASE KO.

a

N/A

—

16. FINAL CASE DISPOSITION }

vA
; 2 oe A
OPEN : : a
17, ROFL 22 ING os ean (sttyaTore) | £
“ft 2: eet, eo Oye. le; Ange
Sergeant Stevens £. Butler’

‘ “0037

19. APPROVES [SfGNATURE & TITLED a
. eas ne
Captain Pete N. Manthos

48. DATE |

| 05-15-72



--- Page 44 ---
'{ 2, NATURE brincioegy? OS . : Lo . YU
Burglary II . .

: 3, REPORTED BY: . . . r) . , [4. ADDRESS . :) . 5. meee Pn

| : le ah IPT) Vave ) Lam] at rep field ee ya

J. ADOITICNAL DETAILS GF INCIDENT: | ° . an
At approximately 1400 hears, mesday, May 6, 1972, Mie*Mavarro contacted Officer
Adrian Roza -Sonsalez ab 1310 L. Street, H.W. and stated the following items missi
( Portable Radios), one (1) Sanyo AN/SH Portable Radio, two (2) Panasenic PY
and one (1) Westinghouse AY/PH/S2 Radio. Also taken was one (1) Braun Electric Shaver,
one (1) Womens pullover sweater, and an unknowm number of beoks.

aa eee

. . -
. iad .¢
. ’ °
1 . . a . Pa
| : . .
| . .
.
. ~ é
v-
. ~- ° 7, « .
. : toe
*.
’ .
. a . . . sort
. . . * we .
° . . .
. . ' . . . .
- > Lo : . . .
. . . : . - : .
. : . . a .
: - . ’
jam ) . oo. . °
8. SUSPECT-AC/OR ARRESTED PERSONS, IDENTIFY BY NAME, AOTALSS, SEX, RACE, SECIAL SECURITY KUUDER, Oo, EYES, ETC, N/A
u

UST NAME | . FIRST | « MIDOLEY

. | ACDRESS 5
Me :

RACE | SEX 4 |REIGHT | = WEIGHT |

HAIR } fves | « DATE OF BIRTK | . SOCIAL SECURITY KO.

. sLAST KAME { First | MIDDLE | ADRESS |
(2),
RACE | -8tx.) HEIGHT |. WEIGHT | HAIR |. EYES | . DATE OF BIRTH |. SOCIAL SECURITY HO. PRATIONALIT
9, ARREST PO | -] 10. ARREST KO, | Mt. ARREST OFFICER (HAME & BASSE KO. 13. noes
.
14, CURRENT CASE DISPOSTION | \ AS, USSSeID CASE NO, |
oe ¢ oo. oe ~_— oe . - .
usgoe J . a Pigtosen “| e.Pauxrodxdeo | DEVEL CARED ey ARREST | N/A
16. FINAL CASE DISPOSITION | .
. . . . 00 Lelaed
OPEN . _ . er oe?

15. APPROVEO ($74. KEE Tt \ti
acd NA
Captain Pete N. Manthos

7, REPORTING SFEICER Istepatopel

1 :
Lo f- Bhitin EO ye Le: Ltd eg
Sexpeant Stevens E,- Butler



--- Page 45 ---
Fe | oy » fords Seles foes. af UCD, fp s-72. petel OF ES,

1B. COMPLAINANT'S OCCUPATION AND HRS

nae

39, DESCRISE LOCATION OR VYPE OF PheLilse

> C4A/khA FI BASS

R, CRIME

BYetG-, IZ
9, LOCATION OF CRIME (Acécess)
_ IZ 27asS. Ase Vtlh

$11, WEAPON, TOOL, FORCE GR JSAM USED
> X.
12. METHOO USED
E ONK

CODE} RES, ADDRESS

COLoa{s)

33, CLASSIE.CATICN

b
pong hicks | HOME PHONE

4g \3A/-772/

cope: .. oO" NER R- REPORTING PERSON
pUODE: 6 COMPLAINANT P+ PARZHT/GUAR
22, WAIE (Last, First 2)
vA ZA ERO) 2 EAI

pean faTrdal ive Coudseser

EUS.P

| pest i7- 7-4

25, IDENTIFY SUSPECTS TY NULSER tnctste Meme, Adress, Sets

ézo, Ho‘cht, Weistt, Eyes, Hair, Clothing etc.
IF ARRESTED Give ARAEST RUMSER AND ¢ CHARGE @nit ces

on Uf arrested)

Q)-

26, NATURE OF INJURIES AND LOCATION ON BODY 27. HOSPITALIZED -ViHERE?

. : OD Ann
b me, ” > _ fu ; 0 Fewra
.4 28. TRANSPORTED CY 29. TREATED BY . . .
A }- GA

30. TYPE OF PROPERTY TAKER . 31. Loss VALUE 32, TRADEMARKS, Tk CONVERSATION oF SUSPECT |
r WK je LK “AAA

3. EXACT LOCATION OF PRP 34. FOInT OF ENTRY [53- vette’ FROM TAG NO. STATE YOARTANO MARE

Ws lgdle Le Fanthssy i
36. ay cor

. UNED ABCVE. (2) EECRISE I (3) DE
NARRATE PROPERTY INDICATE DPOSHION AAD DESSHISE ALL PROSERTY IVOLGED, USE ©

PORT IF'MORE SPACE ISNSEDED, RECORD VALUE OF LOSS ESTIMATED SY VICTIM. a

Su/S~ The oe nee or ed, ‘Le “DS eterno aned ghl TA 2

off le 4 gs ls Yew d adAslitas [2p few al TAs
Ley AgyeecT B Fok kow Ler,

lea Aw Sp7e tilLl oo Sceve

| Lawl CAY 73 5~ ow Sceve moet

|OFK Lele oF ELSE. AecLv Ea PEMERTR BPS:

‘ : corre use ore
pale ESTE THIS REPORT

SYS -74 BeO|
STAIUS eee Cre) (DUE zo

As. ee hey ey} )STIA Ke oreo Qctosto O susPzncep

43, SECOND GEMC=i# UNIT & B. ADGE RO, 4a, Ui nis ROVIS

BL. Lowa: TPC. CiLL SY an

FO 261 RUVISEO377L MFIROBOIITSN ONLICE NEDLETICSNT wacuir

7.7. NUMBER



--- Page 46 ---
, OGC 73-0930
.25 May 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD | a

SUBJECT: Identity61 | Break Inon 15 May 1972

\ .-

1, On-24 May 1973 I telephoned Mr. James Robinson,
General Crime Section, Department of Justice and asked if he
had any information as to criminal prosecution of persons involved

"ina breakin at Identity 61 ‘in Washington, D.C. on

15 May 1972, Mr. Robinson stated he had no knowledge of this but
suggested that it would be better to check with Mr. G. Marvin Gentile,
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Security, Department of State, and

the Secret Service since they had responsibilities for the Executive
Protective Service (EPS). I telephoned Mr. Gentile and he identi-
fied two State Department cables relative to the incident; one from

the embassy in Santiago to the Department, No. 2450, dated-

15 May 1972, Subject: Unauthorized Entry Outlining the Protest

of the Iden 76 Government presented to the American Embassy,

and the State Department reply to Santiago, No. 084655, dated

15 May 1972. Mr. Gentile also identified the EPS. report of ©

investigation and suggested that I get a copy frorn the Secret Service.
I then called Mr. Tom Kelly at Secret Service and he had his liaison
man deliver me a copy of the EPS Yeport of investigation.

2. On 25 May 1973 I received a call from FBI Agent
Ray Muilens on green phone No. 5303 stating that he had received
a telephone call from Mr. James Robinson relative to my inquiry
about prosecution, Mr. Mullens indicated that the FBI Washington
Field Office had recontacted the Metropolitan Police Department (MPD)
on 24 May and reviewed the report No. 248-424 filed with the 3rd
District, MPD which states that a break in occurred at Identity 61
between 5:00 and 8:00 a.m. on 15 May 1972.

. \



--- Page 47 ---
Reparted loss at thafPn- consisted of four « am jecios

and one electric razor, The police investigation

identified
some latent fingerprints but no identification of those prints
was made. Since the reported loss was under $5,000 and there
was.no evidence of a crossing of state boundries,
not make an investigation of the incident. The MPD reported

the FBI did

that there had been no prosecution and no suspect was identified,

- ec: Legislative Counsel
. . Inspector General
OGC:JKG:cav
Orig - Subject: Watergate Case
1 - JKG Signer .
1 -Chréno . ~

-2-'

pi Ncw

PHN K. GPs
fea General Cdtnsel



--- Page 48 ---
1. June 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR: Mr. William E. Colby

SUBJECT: Special Activities

1. Following our recent conversation, ’ Y have
‘searched. my memory and Mr. McCone's files for examples
of activities which to hostile observers or to somcone
without complete knowledge and with a special kind of
motivation, could be interpreted as examples of activities
excoeding/CIA's charter) Ty, TFK IVE

2. First, as we discussed, on 7 March 1962,
DCL McCone , under pressure from Attorney General Robert
F. Kennedy, agreed to tap the telephones of columnists
Robert S. Allen and Paul Scott in an effort to identify
their sources for classified information which was appear -
ing in their columns. Because the primary source appeared
to be in the Department of Defense, MNecCone ordered me
personally to brief General Joe Carroll, Director of DIA,
orally, which I did. JI understand more complete information |
on this operation is available from the Director of Security.
I, personally, managed to avoid gaining any knowledge of
what precise actions were taken, what information was gained,
what was done with it, and when the operation was terminated.

3. As a result. of a developing relationship with
IDEN-122 _ theldEN-123representative in Washington,
and also as a result of certain information conveyed by
IDEN-124 , James Angleton, with the approval of
Dick Helms, agreed to mount a counterespionage operation
against the IDEN-95 in Washington. This involved
breaking and entering and the removal of documents from

many e ary min neyee aan ane

d ; a
wy Lneiidid ul tw
Purr eat
Bars Wah



--- Page 49 ---
atte ag toler ieee Raed

Sv ae Tae Atte hs
7 a ; 4
Reso de ae Hf cok wit wides

q

BS ony o
2

the: IDEN-126 On 18 June 1962, DCI McCone and.
Helms briefed Secretary of State Rusk generally. on the
operation without going into operational details. Later
on the same day, President John F. Kennedy was briefed.
Actual breaking and entering occurred, somewhat later, and
on 15 April 1963, DCI McCone met with President Kennedy
alone and briefed the President on the details of this
new phase of the operation. On the same day, the Attorney
General was briefed and he agreed that he would not
mention it to the FBI unless the FBI themselves raised
it with him. On 3 February 1964, DCI McCone met alone
with President Lyndon B. Johnson and briefed him on the
operation. On 4 February McGeorge Bundy was briefed.

On 6 February 1964 in a briefing of Secrefary of State
Rusk on the results of the operation, Rusk expressed
reservations about:.the propricty of such an operation.

He raised this same concern in subsequent conversations
with McCone on 17 April 1964, 28 May 1964, and 14 June
1964. On 12 September 1964 Rusk ‘continued to express
grave reservations and repeatedly suggested that the

- IDEN-93 be iniormed directly that we knew about their
espionage operations in the United States and ask them
to desist. Ina meeting on 28 May 1964 Rusk expressed
these reservations in the presence of DCI MeCone and
President Jonn F.. Kennedy. . Secretary of Defense. McNamara
was also present, and there is no record that he had
previously been made aware of this operation.

’ 4. Although certain activities never got beyond
‘the planning stage, there are, I believe, three exanples
of. such planning which could be subject to misinterpretation.
One involved chemical warfare operations against the rice

“erops in both Cuba and North Vietnam. A second involved
a paramilitary strike against the Chi-Com nuclear instal-

_ lations. Outside. the United States Government. General
‘Eisenhower was briefed on such planning. A third, which
assumes a new significance. today, involved a proposal by
Angleton and Helms for a greatly increased intelligence
collection effort against foreign installations in this
country. This planning also involved a scheme for selected

SNE AO aes bhi Lets

eewvenia df

:

. a
. . 1a
eet werd da od



--- Page 50 ---
an rn Or
: an ae

Ry tae eee gt to
wistsdeda fi é Retad weld dd U do

rss P8706

bau Usha ©

3

Wu, exposure of KGB activities and counteractions against the
A Soviet intelligence service. The reasons are still-unclear
NU to me as to why the FBI chose to brief the PFIAB to the
oO, effect that(CIA was planning to wiretap extensively and
cindiscriminately in this country, to greatly increase
. the Agency representation in the Moscow Embassy and
' generally to use KGB-type tactics, also extensively and

: indiscriminately. This led to a heated exchange between
DCI McCone and Mr. Belmont of the FBI, one such meeting
‘ . taking place in the presence of the Attorney General.
It is clear that the TBI was opposed to any such: proposal
then, as now, and the plan never went forward.

5. During the period when Des FitzGerald was in
charge of the Cuban Task Force, DCI McCone's office
learned, quite by accident, that FitzGerald had secured
the cooperation of several prominent US business firms

i in denying economic items to Cuba. There was no question’
but that the businessmen were glad to cooperate, but know-
ledge of this operation had to be rather widespread.

6. On 17 April 1964, Mr. Robert B. Anderson came
to DCI MeCone on behalf of American business interests,
offering to insert some $300,000 to try to secure a
favorable result in the elections in Panama. Shortly
after this approach, ‘WEN-128 | of IDEN-129

made a similar proposal to McCone in: connection
with elections ‘in Chile. On 12 May’ 1964 at a meeting of
the 303 Comaittee, it was decided that the offers of
American business could not be accepted. it being neither
a secure way nor an honorable way of doing such business.
This declaration of policy at this time bears on the recent
ITT hearings, but I am not surprised that McCone has
‘forgotten thathe helped to set the precedent of refusing
to accept such collaboration between the > Agency’ s operations
_and private business.

7. <At the direction of Attorney General Robert.
/ Kennedy and with the explicit approval of President Kennedy,
. MeCone injected/the agency ,Jand particularly IDEN-36

Fn nt
ro . rrr
t . . : . 1 1 Hl ” .

pee AA

Va Ree ent : he

ERS ¢ nee : an

ins



--- Page 51 ---
ee, OD AAPR De

a Sr
Ucaeid

Foreign suse ‘for Activities Plann to Disrupt
’ or Harass the Republican National Convention

SUMMARY: . co oo mo, . : °

There is little new evidence of foreign plans or efforts
to inspire, support, or take advantage of actions designed to
disrupt or harass the Republican National Convention in San
Dicgo, 21 to 23. August 1972. The Students for a Democratic
Society, in joining the ranks of domestic groups planning
‘actions at the Republican Convention, has adopted a proposal
to cooperate with Mexican workers and students in a demonstra-
tion in Tijuana, Mexico, during. the Convention. The San Diego
Convention Coalition (SDCC), another domestic group targetting
on the Convention, has received a letter of solidarity from
the North Vietnamese...The letter is of interest as an indica-
tion of North Vietnamese contact’ with the SDCC; such contact °
will be required for the SDCC to implement its earlier-reported
plans for broadcasts over public address systems during the
ponvention of live telephone calls from the Vietnamese in

aris, - -_ ~

DEVELOPMENTS:

._.At its recent convention in Cambridgc, Massachusetts,
held 30 March to 2 April 1972, the Students for a Denocratic
Society (SDS) adopted a proposal to hold demonstrations at
the San Dicgo-Tijuana border during the Republican National
Convention. -The proposal included a call for SDS to cooperate

: with Mexican workers and students in an action to occur during
a fiesta in Tijuana, where Convention delegates will be
entertained, ; oy

.

The North Vietnamese have given thcir endorsement to
the San Diego Convention Coalition (SDCC) in the form of a
letter from the Vietnam Committee for Solidarity with the
‘American People (VCSWAP), a quasi-official organ of the
North Vietnamese Government. The letter, which has been
. _Circulated by the SDCC and is dated 27 January 1972,
so ‘expresses "great delight" with the formation of the SDCC,
: ’ and conveys the Committee's "best wishes of militant soii-
darity and friendship." The VCSWAP requests that the SDCC
.. Write often and "send us materials you have." :

reeces
0 SOW

Maat

| oo * pENTER!

. I CATIA Presse A Reser
; ji Fore CRISES SSE

' . .


--- Page 52 ---
GBH

QS KAY 1972.

.

Foreign Support for. Activities Planried to Disrupt
-———or-Hlarass the. Republican National Convention

SUMMARY:

Indications remain limited of foreign plans or attempts
‘.t0 inspire, support, influence, or exploit actions designe
to disrupt or harass the Republican Natdonal Convention in
fw... ,—etiami, Florida, 21-23 August 1972. A'member of the Swedish
, Committee for Vietnam, who is also a member cf the Secre-
tariat of the Stockholm Conference on Vietnam, has stated
that the U.S. National Electicns are playing a role in
—--——_—the.Swedish Committee's work. The British-based Interna-
_ tional Confederation for Disarmament and Peace (ICDP) ‘has
distributed a "Spring Offensive Calendar" of activities
in the United States against the war based on a submission ©
———py the Peoples! Coalition for Peace and Justice (PCPJ).
The calendar includes actions planned in connection with
+ the Republican Convention.

DEVELO? S:

.I-. mid-April 1972, a member of the Swedish Committee
*. - for Vi tnam, who is also an influential and well-infermed
‘ staff sember of the Secretariat of the Stockholm Conference
. on Vietnam, stated ina privave discussion cf the Swedish
Committee! S unusually heavy work load that "things will be
hectic right until the elections in the U.S."

Ts The International Confederation for Disarmament and
= mace, a British-based antivar organization and one of the
. more prominent member organizations of the Stockholm Con-
‘ference, has attached a "Spring Offensive C2lendar" to the
April-May 1972 issue of its resula r international publics3-
tion Vietnam International. The calendar hed been furnished

iby the People's Usalition for Peace and Just ice (PCPJ) and.
._dneluded the following entry:

a

August 21-23 Republican Convention, Sen Diego.
: Demonstrations organized by the San
Diego Convention Coalition, Box 8267,.
San PIeEO » Ca. 92103.



--- Page 53 ---
y _ Zhe ICDP consent on the PCPS calendar urges demonstrations
‘In support of some.of the dates’ listed but does not specificaill;
call for actions in connection with the Republican Convention.

-. : . -

.
.



--- Page 54 ---
a a ; . 14 JUN 1972."
, ‘Foreign Support for Activities Planned to Disrupt
-, or Harass the Republican National Convention

_ SUMMARY: a -, .
The only new indication of foreign plans or efforts
to inspire, support, influence, or exploit actions. designed
to disrupt or harass the Republican National Convention in
Miami, Florida, 21-23 August 1972, is an’expression of
interest by a menoder of the North Vietnamese Delegation to
the Paris Peace Talks in the plans of the major antiwar
organizations in the United States for demonstrations in
connection with the political conventions of both major
parties.

DEVELOPMENTS: |

In mid-May 1972, a member of the North, Vietnamese
Delegation to the Paris Peace Talks invited a visitor to
contact him again when the visitor.returned from an imminent
trip to the United States. The North Vietnamese official
gave the visitor the New York City addresses of the People's
Coalition.for Peace and Justice (PCPJ) and the National
Peace Action Coalition (NPAC), and asked the visitor to
inquire at their offices regarding their plans for demonstra~
tions during the coming summer. The North Vietnamese
official stated that he was especially interested in plans

for actions in connection with the Democratic and Republican
Nagional Conventions. .

°

HO Foster ersgeyp
tee [£5 ths

S3til ERO 7
Ei


--- Page 55 ---
SRI hn Set to heme dd abe “dee me
SRP Te eee mo

Foreign Support for Activities Planned to Disrupt
‘* or Harass the Republican National Convention

There are no additional indications of any substantial
foreign plans or efforts to inspire, support, or take advyan-
tage of activities designed to disrupt or harass the National.

Convention of the Republican Party in Miami, Florida, 21-24
August 1972. - :

Ho Foreign “Disser/Ilo Dissem Abrzai

-—_ Controlled Dissem

Oo 88 ain wi



--- Page 56 ---
. , ' -. 26 JUL 1972
. ‘ . @ . A. % Sd . ,
Forcign Support for Activities Planned to Disrupt
or Harass the Republican National Convention . -_
SUMMARY :

Nevr indications of foreign plans. or efforts to inspire,
‘support, influence, or exploit activities designed to dis-
rupt or harass the Republican National Convention in Miami,
Florida, 21-24 August 1972, consist of the following: A
leader of the People's Coalition for Peace and Justice
(PCPJ) has stated that demonstrations will be organized to

take place at United States and allied military installa-

tions abroad during the period immediately before and during
the Republican Convention. The PCPJ leader also stated that
representatives of the Stockholm Conference on Vietnam will

““participate in activities in connection with the Convention.
‘The Anti-War Union (ANU), a domestic organization which has
been active in planning demonstrations in connection with the
Republican National Convention, has sent a delegation to
Paris, France, to meet with officials of the Democratic Repub-
lic of Vietnam (DRV) and the Provisional Revolutionary Govern-
ment of South Vietnam (PRG). No information is presently
available, however, indicating that actions at the Republican
Convention have been discussed at these meetings.

. DEVELOPMENTS:
In an early July 1972 meeting with prominent members of

.. foreign antiwar organizations, a representative of the People's

Coalition for Peace and Justice (PCPJ) , who occupies an impor-

tant position within that organization, discussed the plans

of the PCPJ.in connection with the upcoming election campaign

in the United States. The PCPJ representative stated that

during the. period 14-23 August, a "Peoples Campaign Against

Bombing" would be waged in U.S. cities. involved in the manu-

facture and shipping of materials for use in Vietnam, and

that similar actions will be organized at United States and

allied military installations abroad. The PCPJ representa-

tiye further stated that "dramatic demonstrations" in protest

MVICALLT Doin e lui Gt
_Inpossible_ to deternis

1G GCL
SELLE ECE SOURCES

ALSy OFC Lote revere ny

(uale: s impos. wale § insert Ge er ae

Na Fate EQS

wot



--- Page 57 ---
Of the bombing in@rctnan are being — by the "Repub-
‘lican Party National Convention Coalition" to occur on

21 August 1972. In an apparent reference to the 21 August
actions, the PCPJ leader added that representatives of the
Stockholm Conference on: Vietnam will speak on the subject of ~~
the alleged American bombing of dikes in North Vietnam.
' (Comaent: We have no.present information concerning plans of.
Stockholm Conference representatives to travel’to the United
States during the Republican National Convention; nor do we
have any additional information concerning plans of Stockholn
Conference representatives’ to participate in activities con-
nected with the Republican Convention. )

The Anti-War Union (ANU), a domestic group engaged in
organizing counter-activities at the Republican National Con-
vention, has sponsored the travel of a delegation of activists

- to Paris, France, to meet with officials of the Democratic
Republic of North Vietnam (DRV) and the Provisional Revolu-

- sptionary Government of South Vietnam (PRG). An advance party

*has already met with DRV and PRG representatives to discuss
the agenda for meetings with the full.AWU delegation. Although
no information is presently available indicating that actions
at the Republican Convention have been discussed or are sched-
uled to be discussed at meetings between the AWU delegation
and the DRV/PRG officials, it is known that members of the AWU
advance party have asked for advice from the PRG officials
regarding the stance the ANU should take on certain questions
relating to the presidential elections. It is also known

that the DRV officials have questioned the AWU advance party
about the political mood in the United States. One of the
AWU delegation. members has stated that upon their return to
the United States about 26 July 1972, some of the members
‘will speak at rallies, over the radio, and on television,

to "educate the American people about the consequences of
‘voting for Nixon, and the need to end the war and defeat
Nixon." The delegation member added that the demonstrations
-at-the Republican Convention will be "unique."

Quis 4 0) miapre
panes het UoLk: . we
‘ny, ay Dene get Apaas : -

no} fe AC Po cnce de U C:3 ioutut ABRoAD , iY 00582



--- Page 58 ---
2 AUG 1372,

’ . : . 6

Foreign Support for Activities Planned to Disrupt
or Harass the Republican National Convention

. : ‘

SUMMARY: 7 ,
There are no new indications of specific foreign plans or efforts to
inspire, support, influence, or exploit activities designed to disrupt or
harass the Republican National Convention in Miami, Florida, 21- 24 August!
1972. Although meetings have been held recently in Paris, France, between
'. American antiwar activists-and representatives of the Democratic Republic
of North Victriam (DRV) and the Provisional Revolutionary Government of
South Victnam (PRG), currently available information indicates that the
. DRV/PRG officials made no efforts to encourage or give guidance to the
American participants with respect to the upcoming Republican National
Convention. Private discussions, separate from the meetings with the entire
American délegation, were conducted by both the DRV and the PRG officials;
.at present, we have no information regarding the substance of these private
xchanges. A second group of activists, considered more important than
the first delegation, is sclreduled to travel to Paris on or about 1 August 1972
for further consultations: with the PRG and DRV representatives.

DEVELOPMENTS: _ ;
In recent mectings in Paris, France, with members of an American
del¥ gation sponsored by the Anti-War Union (AWU), representatives of
the Democratic Resublic of Vietnam (DRV) and the Provisional Revolutionary
Government of South Vietnam (PRG) -were very guarded with respect to dis-
cussing activities at the Republican National Convention. Although the Vietnam-
: ese repeatedly questioned the Americans concerning the mood of the antiwar
im movement in the United States, they made no direct reference to the Repub-
lican Convention, except for’one instance when PRG Deputy Chief Nguyen
Nan TIEN accused President Nixon of using the private and public sessions
a of the Paris peace talks as "propaganda for the Republicen Convention."
i : TIEN then urged the Americans to promote and propagandize the Seven
Point Plan offered by the PRG. The Americans, too, for the most part, |
refrained from discussing the Convention, other than to estimate that demon~
strators will number about 10,000 at the Convention.

SCHEDTLE OF E.G.
mer ITNT Pe ney moors :

1 . § 5301), Q. G) oe
 COEREES iyoen ‘ AUYOMATCaLLY eich. voekeicd ui
NO renga BETH

Zp ORINGEIe areas impossible to dete

Liv dity Remba ae et

WAG HONCE
CHSITIVE SHTUIHIGE SCE SOURCES

2


--- Page 59 ---
Following their meeting on 22 July 1972 with the AWU delegation,
the PRG officials held additional talks with sub-groups of the delegation.

. Additionally, at least one of the American participants was invited by

the DRV officials to return for further discussions. At present, there

is no information available Concerning the substance of. these private

exchanges .

A second, more important delegation ‘of Americans connected with

the Anti-War Union is scheduled to travel to Paris circa ] August 1972
for further consultation with DRV and PRG representatives. This second
group is scheduled to be led by Rennic DAVIS, founder and leader of the

.AWU. This will be DAVIS' second trip to Paris within recent ‘months for
discussions with DRV and PRG representatives, Upon his return from
his first trip, DAVIS publicly stated that the AWU would demonstrate at
both the Democratic and the Republican Convention, but that the AWU's

_ chief target would be the Republican Convention. .

Ata
roy t pas Pesta
LL: rere
UA caer Mneeseteted ate



--- Page 60 ---
Be

oo 6 Do 7 "9 AUG. 1972

. Forcign Support for Activities Planned to Disrupt
. _ or Harass the Republican National Convention :

There are no new indications, as of this date, of foreign plans
or efforts to inspire, support, or take advantage of activities designed
to disrupt or harass the National Convention of the Republican Party
in Miami, Florida, 21-24 August 1972.

.
°
. ’
. -
IS . -
.
. é .
- - .
.
a . .
‘ . . \-
a
L
tyes
. . 0 ecs

CLASSIFIED RY
ENXEMUT faen Ges
whe OF EC 41's:
E Sot, CV, ee :
AUT CSIAT CALLE OL aie Ut

.

Fe Saleh tien Tod oe .
RTL meen
:

SENSITIV Perr impossible to determin”
een warn een Tn mnremnmenrene ete cma ane

ne on
. . .



--- Page 61 ---
peo a Ou ORES TEEN GS

Foreign Support for Activities Planned to. Disrupt
Or Harass the Democratic National Convention

«0.6 WAR i972

‘ SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION:

: . There are no direct indications thus, far of foreign

po efforts to inspire, support or take advantage of activities

. designed to disrupt or harass the National Convention of
the Democratic Party in Miami; 10-13 July 1972. The concept
of coordinated international support for domestic activities
in the United States was generally endorsed at the recent ~
World Assembly for Peace and Independence of the Peoples
of.Indochina; however, the Conference issued.no specific _
call for international support of disruptive actions at the
American national political conventions... . -,

BACKGROUND: . ct 2 .
At.the Soviet-controlled World Assembly for Peace
‘and Independence of the Peoples! of Indochina, held in
Versailles from 10-13 February 1972, there was mention of
American plans for demonstrations at both the Republican
and Democratic National Conventions. The final draft 7
_ resolution from the conference's "Action Commission" con- .
tains an appendix submitted by American delegates whose
; goal was to secure global coordination for domestic actions
in the United States. It calls for international support
to six weeks of domestic antiwar actions and demonstrations, .
.~ rom 1 April to 15 May 1972, and concludes with the state-
- ment: "This campaign will lead up to the Democratic Party
Convention at Miami on July 9, 1972, and the Republican -
Party Convention in.San Diego on August 21,-1972."

The final "Resolution of the Paris World Assembly
for the Peace and Independence of the Indochinese People"
. of 13 February 1972, drafted by the "Political Commission"
~ states:

oy : "In the United ‘States . particularly, the | protest
»/ ol. 7 + against the’ war is voiced more and more “strongly,

OMTRS foe

uAMU
PA FESR BD

Be - 7



--- Page 62 ---
ee

“under. various "forms, such as “draft evasions

Penary

,
desertions, resistance, - ‘demonstrations which

now affect even the soldiers. The Assembly
calls for support to. these progressive and
antiwar forces in the United States, and asks
the governments to grant asylum to deserters
and to support their right to repatriation.

“All together, the peoples of the world will
_ efficiently help to impose on the U.S. Govern-
-. Ment the-restoration of peace, independence —

and freedon in Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia."

pyre ts nian
Co cat

tenn einer aa] ee i “ Pe elie
a Ch Hiss Looe . .

- cee etes sae, ate.



--- Page 63 ---
“09 MAY 1872

~ Foreign Support for Activities Planned to Disrupt
* ox Harass the Democratic National Convention

SUMMARY? Te — .

New indications of foreign efforts or - piatis to inspire,
support, influence, or exploit actions designed to disrupt
or harass the Democratic National Convention in Miami, 10-15"

' July 1972, are limited -to a reiteration by a member of the
Secretariat of the Stockholm Conference on Victnam of a
statement previously issued by the World Assembly for Peace
and Independence of the Peoples of Indochina. The Assemdly's

"pronouncement generally endorsed the concept of international
support to a campaign of anti-Vietnam War activities in the
United States leading up to the Democratic and Republican
Conventions, but made no specific call for support of dis-
ruptive actions at the conventions themselves.

. : . . . XN.

DEVELOPMENTS: .
: In early April 1972 an influential and well-informed
staff member of the Stockholm Conference on Vietnam discussed,
in private, the international anti-Vietnam War activities —~
conducted on 1, 15, and 22 April. The Stockholm Conference
member stated that these actions were part of an international
‘Campaign in support of domestic American antiwar efforts
during the period 1 April to 15 May 1972, and “will culminate
at the. election conventions in July and August. an

The World Assembly for Peace and Independence of the
Peoples of Indochina, of which the Stockholm Conference was
a.major organizer, had earlier enunciated a similar statement
in-an appendix to the final draft resolution of the Assembly's

‘“Action Commission." The appendix called for international
support to six weeks of domestic antiwar actions and demon-
strations, from 1 April. to 15 May 1972, and concluded with

““the statement: "This campaign will lead up to the Democratic

Party Convention at Miami on July 9, 1972, and the Republican

Party Convention in San Diego on ‘August 21, 1972."

\ :

“4

Cones oy Peer
wo. eke wid
fo Feneey nwa J mst Ba xd,



--- Page 64 ---
Called Uresenis £ nk

TPGLLE ‘

ae ) HUNT) EQRE Ne oe
_ Rhine pss - 7 43 HAY 1972

Foreign Support for Activities Planned to Disrupt
_* a Or ',Harass the Democratic. National Convention \ -

SUMMARY: by

Indications remain limited of forcign plans or attempts
} . to inspire, support, influence, or ‘exploit actions designed
to disrupt or harass the Democratic National Convention in
Miami, Florida, 10-13 July 1972. A member of the Swedish

; Committee for Vietnam, who is also a member of the Secre-

| : tariat of the Stockholm Conference on Vietnam, has stated
that the U.S. National Elections. are playing a role in

the Swedish Committee's work. The British-based Interna-
tional Confederation for Disarmament and Peace (ICDP) has
distributed a “Spring Offensive Calendar" of activities

in the United States against the war based on a submission
by the Peoples' Coalition for Peace and Justice (PCPJ).

The calendar includes actions planned in connection with
the Democratic Convention.

DEVELOPMENTS: .

: : In mid-April 1972, a member of the Swedish Committee
for Vietnam, who is also an influential and well-informed
staff member of the Secretariat of the Stockholm Conference
on Vietnam, stated in-a private discussion of the Swedish
Committee's unusually. heavy work load that “things will be
hectic right until the elections in the U.S."°

. The International Confederation for Disarmament and
Peace, a British-based antiwar organization and one of the
more prominent member organizations of the Stockholm Con-
ference, has attached a "Spring Offensive Calendar" to the
April- May 1972 issue of its regular.international publica-
tion Vietnam International. The calendar had been furnished
by the People's Coalition for Peace and Justice (PCPs) and
included the following entry?

July 9 - 12. Democratic Convention, Miami -Beach.
ta : Demonstrations organised by Florida
¢ People's Coalition, Box 17521, Tampa,
. Florida 33612,

PAYTRGULEN Mrtarn FO hy -
CORRE ny Dresed 00s C3.
UT nega at



--- Page 65 ---
The ICDP commentary on the PCPJ calendar utges demonstrations
Ne ° in support of some of the dates listed but does-not specifically
, . -call for actions in connection with the Democratic Convention.
t
! -
' .
. :
!
e
uf .
any . : . . . triesry
{ : ~— 00s fet
! . NwyTSs : re
: - CANINSETA pinoens

Me ob teee
fo times paaseen a



--- Page 66 ---
7 JUN 1972

‘ ee eS ee atte

o, TN ateeg eatytt te ‘et tae

. Foreign Support for Activities Planned to Disrupt
-or Harass the Democratic National Convention

’

SUMMARY: - : oy

The only new indication of foreign plans or efforts

- to inspire, support, influence, or exploit actions designed
to disrupt or harass the Democratic National Convention in

’ Miami, Florida, 10-13 July 1972, isan expression of interest
by a member of the North Vietnamese Delegation to the Paris
Peace Talks in the plans of the major antiwar orgaiizations
sin the United States for demonstrations in’ connection with
the political conventions of both major parties.

DEVELOPMENTS: Hs

In mid-May 1972, a member of the North Vietnamese Dele-
’ , gation to the Paris Peace Talks invited a visitor to contact
him again when the visitor returned from an imminent trip
to the United States. The North Vietnamese official gave
the visitor the New York City addresses of the People's .
Coalition for Peace and Justice (PCPJ) and the National
Peace Action Coalition (NPAC), and asked the visitor to
inquire at their offices regarding their plans for demon-
. Strations during the coming summer. The North Vietnamese
boc -official stated that he was especially interested in plans
: for actions in connection with the Democratic and National
“Conventions.



--- Page 67 ---
Me ee ee ee

21 Jun 1972

. we or . Pd
. . o. os on =. .
7 7 ert. Sere een te ote ogee her gee oN, Sythe mite dene seems bho? sn@rqe. eet oe
Foreign Support for Activities Planned to Disrupt . *

or Harass the Democratic National Convention
There are no additional indications, as of this date, of foreign plans
or efforts to inspire, support, or take advantage of activities designed to
disrupt or harass the National Convention of the Democratic Party in Miami,
Florida, 10-13 July 1972. an .



--- Page 68 ---


--- Page 69 ---
“Ore ant ayes " mye 7

. :  Gatite i foc waiave

. :  ) EYES pry | ©

49 at

4

into the US labor situation, and particularly to try

to ameliorate the quarrel between George Meany-and
Walter Reuther. [DEN-36 steered a very skillful
course in this connection, but the Agency could be
vulnerable to charges that we went behind Meany's back,
or were somehow consorting with Reuther against Meany's
wishes.

8. There are three examples of using Agency
funds which I know to be controversial. One was the
expenditure of money under Project NOSES in securing
the release of Cuban Brigade prisoners. Details of
this operation are best known to Larry Jlouston; Mike
Miskovsky - IDEN-131 » and Jamés Smith, | Second,
as you well know, when Lou Concin received his summons
to report to the Joint General Staff Yeadquarters on

1 November 1963 a large amount of cash went with him.
My impression is that the accounting: for this and its
use has never been very frank or complete. Third, at
one of the early Special Group meetings attended by
McCone he took strong exception to proposals to spend
Agency funds to improve the economic viability of West
Berlin, and fox an investment program in Mali. His
general position was that such expenditures were not
within the Agency's charter, and that he would allow
such spending-only on the direct personal request of
the Secretary of State or the Secretary of Defense, or
tue White House.

— . 9. I raise these issues of funding because I
“remember the Agency's being severely criticized by the
House Appropriations Subcommittee for having spent $3,000
for stamps in connection with a program to buy tractors
‘) Ol to secure the release of prisoners from Cuba.

10. Under the heading ‘of old business, I know that
any one who has worked in the Director's office has worried
about the fact that conversations within the offices and
over the telephones were transcribed. During McCone's

tena
eS
po

EROS PY art RQITA Ray NH

. + 0043


--- Page 70 ---
. : BEN | aS py rma

nay pot
BAN BRS

woth UY peal

mS

cat. |

tenure, there were microphones in his regular office,

his inner office, his dining room, his office in East
Building, and his study at his residence on White Haven
Street.. I do not know who would be willing to, raise such
an issue, but. knowledge.of such operations tends to
spread, and certainly the Agency is vulnerable on this
score. . . .

11. Also under the heading’ of old business, I
well remember the hue and cry rates espegially by Carl
Kaysen in the White House, when/the igoney linjected a
contaminating agent in Cuban sug < bound for the Soviet -
Union “J Shortly after the Cuban missile crisis, there was
a disposition in Washington to reexamine the Bay: of Pigs,
and the fact that several Alabama National Air Guard /
officers lost their lives in the Bay of Pigs was surfaced
with surprisingly little excitement at the time.

12. During’ my stint on the 7th floor there was

a special arrangement.with the Office of Communications

whereby the Director's office gained access tofmon “CIA

-Atraific. This surfaced briefly at one point shortly after

“AdwiraY ayborn became DCI. He had visited the Signal
Center and removed a copy of a telegram from the Embassy
in the Dominican Republic for Under Secretary George Ball,
Fyes Only. . We returned to his office and proeeeded to
discuss this telegram with George Ball who was naturally
quite curious as to how Rayborn knew about it, and also as
to how Rayborn had it in his possession before Ball did.

. Ben Read in the Secretary of Stace's office and I spent

weeks putting this one to rest.

13. Finally, DCI. McCone, as you and I well know,
operated on a very lofty planc, and I think certain of
his activities could be misunderstood: One example was.
his decision in July of 1964 to have Aristotle Onassis and
Maria Callas flown from Rome to.Athens. on Air Force KC 135.
Their arrival in Athens in this airplane attracted the ;
attention of the local press and in due course Mr. John -

' .

Sern pyran nes aman ene

\ hoy oy a : 5

Slauutead j ad wera dd ue
‘

Coes

yak

beard bee

3
$

00

>

r

oy)

fs

a)


--- Page 71 ---
.

CC er
Ginetta ky Read aed d IV ds

. .
e EYES ‘yer ]
F wit

~ 6

Hightower, Chief of the Associated Press Bureau for
Washington, came to see me to ask about the propriety
of this action.

(14. The use of . IDEN-132 aircraft

‘has been remarkably secure, but DCI MeCone himself

forgot about the cover arrangement and became quite
exercised when he saw Candidate Goldwater land in ‘the
San Francisco airport for the Republican National Con-
vention in 1964 aboard the IDEN-133 - with
the -highly visible tail nunber jpen-134, This was, I
explained to him carefully, a perfectly legitimate
charter, but he didn't like it.

15. McCone dealt quite extensively. with newsmen
in Washington. In fact, they gave hima gift anda
luncheon when he left Washington, which is perhaps
indicative of the press's relations with him. However,
in the case of the Ross and Wise book, The Invisible
Government, he did try to bring pressure on the publisher
and tie authors to change things. They did not change
a comma, and I doubt that this old saw willeer sing
again. ‘ .

1G. Finally, and this will reflect my Middle
Western Protestant upbringing, NceCone's dealings with
the Vatican, including Pope John XXIII and Pope Paul
I, would and could. raise eyebrows in certain quarters.

17. The above listing is uneven, but I have a
sinking feeling that discipline has broken down, and that
allegations from any quarter which cast these things in
‘the wrong light would receive great publicity and attention,
and no amount of denial would ever set the record straight.
If I may be of any assistance in tracking down further
‘details, I am‘of course at your disposal, but I would point

f
Pn re Oh ee ee Se fol
Me ag ore oy rs
ee Sa de

00 An



--- Page 72 ---
eee

p bide Hy Eisenia} tid

e 15) City
- 7

“~ .
out that I was very much in the position of the

enlisted man who knew that the commissioned officers
were aware of these activities and better able to
judge their propriety and possible impact or misinter-

pretation.

"WALTER ELDER

rr je ot etna
Re dot7it dite i tiled Vd at. bid is

era pes . Le
Ered OC2Y JO



--- Page 73 ---
@ secret sensitive @ ;

~

_ SUBJECT: PLMPLODESTAR

A yy \\ oO . ; Oe a
Ue MPLODESTAR is a Headquarters initiated program

which has as its fundamental objective the long term manipu-

; lations of selected agent assets operating against EA Division
difficult targets in the leftist and communist milieu in various
parts of the world. Although targetted overseas these: agents are
often exposed to and directed against American radical, leftist,
and communist targets to gain a practical knowledge of the leftwing,
radical, communist world. ‘There is.a possibility that an assct

“might become suspect and be accused of being an employee of the
Agency or the Bureai; or it might happen some asset would, for
some reason, become disenchanted with his role and expose his.
Agency relationship and his activities, with resultant embar-
rassment. To minimize potential problems, therefore, each

‘ case is cleared with the FBI and through CI/SO the Bureau is

kept. informed on a regular basis.

o . "SECRET SENSITIVE ° E2 INPDET
BY 061090


--- Page 74 ---
. 6. As a means.of sharing more fully our operational
*,experience we have invited three FBI officers to be
‘students in our Sovict Operatims Course from 14 to 25

May 1973. , G
7. A Soviet defector - - was’ J “ne

“Confined at a CIA facility from April 1964 to
September 1967 while efforts were being made to
“establish whether he was a bona fide defector.
Although his present attitude toward the Agency i
quite satisfactory, the possibility exists that the
press could cause undesirable publicity * ‘if it were
to uncover the story. . 2a

ed AE

David H. Blee
Chicf:* .
Soviet Bloc Division

O0Ba2



--- Page 75 ---
MEMOR,.WDUM FOR: Mr, Colby ro,
Attached is the material, we requested of «Dick

[ Ober:
- — :
: A. Ten Reports, Subj: Foreign Support for

Activities Planned to Disrupt or Harass the
Republican National Convention

B. Five Reports, Subj: Foreign Support for
Activilies Planned to Disrupt or Harass the
Democratic National Convention

-C, Two Memoranda re Agency support to
Secret Service for Democratic and Republican
Conventions

Ober advises that the only American we reported
on to the IEC is Rennie Davis.pé (lt May 73)

TiDRTE)——
4 O0SES |

FoR” NO, tol REPLACES FOtwy 19-107
¥ AUG Sé WHICH MAY oF USED.

i

(a7)


--- Page 76 ---
SECRET

me AND ADDRESS

Inspector General

. Remarks: -
Mr. Broe:

, [nick 0 Oberlhas been advised that this package JCC We)

is Béing seat to you. Since knowledge of the
| existence of this Committee has been strictly
: Mriited. Pive astiad thet if be delivered to you |
unopened. Although it has an ER number on it,
it has not been sent through that office -- J] gave
therm only the day, subject, and originator.

Gaver

Aras
O95a7

_. OATE
hS May 73 ;
UNCLASSIF LD CONFIDENTIAL 7 P SECRET
FORM Ho, 237 Use previous eoiticas : . (40)



--- Page 77 ---
—e-. AS A Tw

ROUTING AND RECOAD SHIE

SUBJECT: (Cptional)

EXTENSION

*E -14 May 1973

if chard Ober

TO: (Officer designoiion, room number, ard DATE i e
bdvild-agh a} OFFICER'S © COMMENTS (Number ecch comment to show fracy wac-
INITIALS | to whom, Drow o line o¢ross column efter each comers.

IDEN- 73
O/TCI

‘ i 1 .
an - rood i 7 i C6
os a tli {——_+__ + of

“sgrouni id note ont
ee per your red

cerning Agency suprert te.
Secret Service (7° Anril and
23 June 1972). -

EYES ONLY

ee a ee

00548

eerie nmr a en

», OJ ULTEMSE Fo

SeCAeT ° (D] cansingttian

2. Copies of memoranda con-!


--- Page 78 ---
@ : 14 hay 1973

SUBJECT: - Intelligence Evaluation Committee and Staff

1. Background: Formed December 1970 to: produce |
fully- evaluated national domestic intelligence studies,
including studies on demonstrations, subversion, extrenisn
and terrorism. Membership: Department of Justice (Chair-

- man); Federal Bureau of Investigation; Department of
Defense; Secret Service; National Security Agency; Central
Intelligence Agency; and as necessary representatives of
other Departments or Agencies (following have partici-
pated: Treasury and State}. Staff: IES Executive
Director John Dougherty. and later Bernard Wells supplied
by Department of Justice with title of Special Assistant
to the Attorney General reporting to the Assistant Attorney

RS: General for a es Security Robert Mardian and. later |
n

Ke Willian Olso Irs has received | requirements directly
Tron and delifered reno ioip pie of the
White fiouse. >, The White louse has insisted that the
existence of this Committee be kept secret. Awareness
of its existence within this Agency has been limited to

HOT, PROT CAP C7 CT aks “Tour ‘ortisers ot” this ofsice,

2. CIA Participation: Contributions on foreign
aspects (by memorandun with no Agency letterhead or at-
tribution). Contributions occasionally include foreign
intelligence provided. by FBI and NSA, The Chief of the
Special Operations Group serves as the Agency representa-
five on the Intelligence Fvaluation Committee Staff and
as the alternate to the Agency representative on the .
Committee (who is the Chief, Counter Intelligence Staff).

3. Special Report: The Unauthorized Disclosure
of Classified Information, November 1971. This study
‘Was initiated in Jury 197 To71 by the White House as a con-
sequence of the President's concern about the release
_ of the Pentagon Papers by Danicl Elisberg. Both Robert
Mardian and G. Gordon Liddy initially involved in tasking
the IFS to produce this evaluation. ‘Drafting done by IES
‘Staff members from Justice and FBI. Only Agency partici-
pation was editorial review., oo 4

W .
z. 2 arp) pv 38?
Se RIMPDET CL py (oe

ns e+

oh
onlarst ap 4 ‘


--- Page 79 ---
4, Republican National Convention (21-24 August
1972): At'’the request of the White House, a series of
estimates was prepared by the IES on "Potential Dis-
ruptions at the 1972 Republican National Convention, frre eels
Miami Beach, Florida." The Agency provided from ;
February through August 1972 periodic contributions for
these estimates concerning foreign support for activi-
ties planned to disrupt or harass the’ Republican
National Convention (copies attached).

5. Democratic National Convention (10-13 July
1972): At the request of the White House, a series of
estimates was prepared by the IES on "Potential Disrup-
tions at’ the 1972 Democratic National Convention, Miami :
Beach, Florida." The Agency provided between March and
July 1972 contributions on foreign support for activi-
ties planned to disrupt or harass the Democratic
National Convention (copies attached). .

Attachments: a/s

ye 00530

amram . :
ee re


--- Page 80 ---
OQ FORIEH HRSG ES Reade .,
Mee . ‘ EAE Th Haare ;

» 2 GQHIRSELES Lisoehi | >
—_ Oe @ 188 Fes 17 Z
val ra - . i a

SUBJECT: Foreign Support For Activities Planned to Disrupt ot

or Harass the Republican National Convention
1. There are only limited indications thus far of
foreign efforts to inspire, support or take advantage of
activities designed to disrupt or harass the National :
Convention of the Republican Party in’ San Diego, 21-23
August 1972. oe
; 2. Some American participants at the Soviet-controlled
World Assembly for Peace and Independence of the Peoples of
Indochina, held 11-13 February .1972 in Paris/Versailles,
attempted unsuccessfully to include a call for international
gemonstrations to take place at the time of the Republican
National Convention. A representative of the San Diego
> Convention Coalition (SDCC), one of the domestic action
groups targetting on the Republican Convention, requested
_the Anerican Delegations' Steering Committee at the World
Assembly to include a specific call for. international
support of activities against the Republican convention
in their proposal to the Action. Commission of ‘the. World
Assembly. this request, however, was dropped as too
divisive by the Steering Committee, despite initial indica-
tions that the proposal would be taken to the floor of
the Assembly. . ; ; oe .

3. John LENNON, a British subject, has provided
financial support to Project "YES", which in turn. paid
*.the travel expenses to the World Assembly of a representa-
tive of leading antiwar activist Rennie DAVIS. (DAVIS' repre-
sentative is tentatively planning to assist in preparations
. for disruptive actions at the San Diego Convention.)
Project "YES" is an adjunct to another LENNOMN-supported pro-
ject, the Election Year Strategy Information Center (EYSIC),
of which Rennie DAVIS is a key leader, which was set up to
direct New Left protest activities at the Republican
National Convention. In Paris Rennie DAVIS' representative
to the World Assembly met at least once with officials of
the Provisional Revolutionary Government of South Vietnam;
it is not known if the Republican National Convention was
discussed. t

00552


--- Page 81 ---
7 ‘ ; : ant Hine
. w :
“¢ . CoH Oye

4. The spc is planning for foreign support for its
harassment of the Republican convention. A. working draft
plan of the SDCC includes’ proposals for (a) the use of a
Special television network to broadcast video-taped messages | ~
from other countries, including coverage of sympathetic : :
demonstrations else where; and (b) broadcasts over public ; .
address systems of live telephone calls from the. Vietnamese
in Paris and from the Communist Chinese and others at the
United Nations.

or

*

© 8 00553.

_ pers pee |.

etn eo Antemr misnrie om poarres Sennen



--- Page 82 ---
ee a . hy uh honudi
: an oo . GThG LEU SSE) _
. 6 Sot, 6. 24 MAR 1372

Foreign Support for Activities Planned to Disrupt
oo or Harass the Republican National Convention

hoboal cit, Ie

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION: oo:

-_____ Indications. remain limited, thus far, of foreign efforts
—~to inspire, support or take advantage of activities designed
to disrupt or harass the National Convention of the Republican
..Party in San Diego, 21-23 August 1972. The concept of coordinated
international support for domestic activities in the United
States was generally endorsed at the recent World Assembly for
Peace and Independence of the Peoples of Indochina; however, the
Conference issued no specific call for international - support of
disruptive actions at the American national political conventions.

BACKGROUND : re
At the Soviet-controlled World Assembly for Peace and
Independence. of the Peoples of Indochina, held in Versailles
from 10-15 February 1972, there was mention of American plans
for demonstrations at both the Republican and Democratic
National Conventions. The final draft resolution fram the
Conference's “Action Commission" contains an appendix submitted
by American delegates whose goal was to secure global coordination
_ for domestic actions in the United States. It calls for inter-
.’ national support to six wecks of domestic antiwar actions and
., demonstrations, from 1 April to 15 May 1972, and concludes with
the statement: “This campaign will: lead up to the Democratic
—_Party.Convention at Miami on July 9, 1972, and the Republican
Party Convention in San Dicgo on August 21, 1972." —

‘The final "Resolution of the Paris World Assembly for the
= eadée-and Independence of the Indochinese People" of 13 February
1972,-drafted by the "Political Commission" states:

"In the United States particularly, the protest against
‘the war is voiced more and more strongly, under various
‘forms, such as draft evasions, desertions, resistance, demon-
Strations which now affect even the soldiers. The Assembly
calls for support to thése progressive and antiwar forces in
_the United States, and asks the governments to grant asylun
to deserters and to support their right to repatriation.
All together, the peoples of the world will efficiently help
to impose on the U.S. Governmmacnt-the restoration of peacc,
and independencé and freedom in Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia."

t—

te
to

aa) TAA ay 7 -
—COMPPOUED DSS oosse
hoo. oo BA FAPTION Aigeetydia Meee mnaaen ‘



--- Page 83 ---
eT)

be GONROLLED BE oki

DEVELOPMENTS: —- _ Ss _

The San Diego Convention Coalition (SDCC), one of the .
‘domestic action groups targetting on the Republican Con-
‘vention, is planning, in addition to demonstrations, for a
“large exposition in the campsights (sic) called Expose 72,
which with novies, exhibits, displays will portray the struggles
of people all over the world." Plans for activities at .
Expose 72 are believed to include (a) the use of a special
television network to broadcast video-taped messages from
other countrics, including coverage of sympathetic denon-
strations elsewhere; and (b) broadcasts over public address

Systems of live telephone calls.from the Vietnamese in Paris

and from the Communist Chinese and others at the United Nations.
In addition, the SDCC has suggested that, in order to “outflank
NIXON donestically and internationally, " international opposition
can be expressed "by obtaining the authority of other countries

‘and liberation movements to carry their flags in SDCC demon -
strations," © ;

APP TET prpante
oot . ‘ . .



--- Page 84 ---
maewlhidh

MEMORANDUM . -
_. SUBJECT: Techniéal - “Operation Against. IDEN- 16 Enbassy
e . : in 1971 and 1972
. 1.

A technical, penetration of the IDEN- 76 Embassy in

"Washington, DB. C. was mounted oy the FBI with the support of
this Agency] in April- May 1971.

This operation, which used-

- _Agency equipment and technical expertise| t but was. managed

operationally by the FBI, was initiated only after then-

Director Richard Helms had gone over the head of former

FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover to obtain the approval of then-
‘Attorney General John N. Mitchell.’ The operation was dis-

continucd at the Agency's request on 2 February 1972 when it

appeared that Director Hoover intended to testify before

Congress concerning audio installations in the U.S. and

identify this operation as[CIA instigated. \
ya

The operation consisted of the following three
technical devices: —

——

_ ay— An AC- powered, masked transmitter and
- two’ switches in the. office occupied by the Deputy
~Chief of Mission, —_ —_

°

-b. An AC-powered, masked transmitter in the

_ office of the Ambassador's secretary which was

00468



--- Page 85 ---
— hse . uo

designed to pick up . high quality audio of typing

in the office, It was hoped to break these audio
signals into clear text using advanced computer
techniques developed by Division D. No useful
Product, however , was ever obtained. ’

c. A battery- powered ,. masked transmitter

and switch concealed in the. : door of the
Embassy,. which would supply crytographic information ‘
for NSA. (Produced excelleny quality Signals. ,

‘until it became inoperative in early ,1972 because of
t

- battery failure.
3. In December 1972 the Agency requested reactivation of —-
the operation for a 60-day trial period in spite of the limited
value of intelligence produced previously (22 disseminations

of only moderate interest). Reactivation was requested because |
of strong interest in the special IDEN-76 government mission

arriving in Washington in late December to conduct high-level

talks. with U.S. State Department officials concerning debt

enegotiation and—other major_i items as outstanding between -the-—

“two-countries. | The operation was reinitiated on 21 December

1972 but was discontinued again on 22 February_1 1973 by “Acting -



--- Page 86 ---
econ Patrick Gray at this Agency's request. Our request

WaS prompted | by a decision that the intelligence production of
this operation did not justify ‘the risks involved in continuing

to run it in the sensitive political climate caused by the

tiount ing disclosures about |CIA involvement jinIOEN-76 This” -

was- especially so because of our reservations about maintaining
proper security for the listening post which, as with other
operational aspects of the case, was under FBI management.

e
&
oe _ — \ _—_—
. _ — = §: —
i}
ek ut an 9) LEED
Uae slas . OL793
ate : . ‘
SECRET |
yee



--- Page 87 ---
' e. Alias’ Social Security Cards. 171 backstonped
Y , accounts havé béén éstaplished for contract personnel
b\ whose relationship with [the Agency] camot be revealed
but who are entitled to Socia ecurity coverage,
Following expiration of the contractual relationship,
at an appropriate time the alias and true name-accounts

are merged permitting the individual to receive con-
plete bencfits upon reaching the age of eligibility.

: £. Alias IRS Tax Accounts. 54 Social Security
numbers have been reeistered for the purpose of. open-
ing .54 new bank accounts since 1 July 1972. 87 in-
dividual tax accounts‘have bcen established with IRS
on an unwitting basis in 14 cities in the United States.

g. Notional Facilities. Sil notional facilities

and Gl telephone answering service addres “ses are maine
tained by CCS in 58 cities in the United States.

; h. Alias Signatories on Bank Accounts. 24 aliases
for signatures on 25 proprietary entity and one notion-
al company bank accounts are in use by 9 officers and 1
proprictary-hire as follows .

CCS/Nags - 5 officers (12 aliases) on 8
proprictary entities and 1

@ : . notional company.

ge _CCS/NY PMC* - 3 officers (9 aliases) on 13

proprietary entities.

_ CCS/NY PMC# - 1 proprictary-hire Q alias)
on 3 proprietary. entities.

CCS/MD PMC* - 1 officer (2 aliases) on 2
; proprietary entities.

*Proprietary Management Company

8

oot ji _ ODSi0.



--- Page 88 ---
-

sensitive nonofficial cover cases under the guise.
of normal commercial annuities. Backstopping for .
this arrangement is provided through CCS-procured
bank accounts and Post Office boxes. 19 retirecs
are currently being handled, _ oo .

k. Credit Union Arrangements for Selected Non-

are not reported to the Internal Revenue Service based

on 50 U.S. Code 403¢ or Internal Revenue Code Section

6041, ; , .
‘Individuals under cover may borrow money from the’

“Credit Union -for the purchase’ of real estate; however,

the mortgage is recorded in the name of a cleared
lawyer and not the actual lendor (Credit Union).

Paragraph 1. deleted because it contains sensitive

Agency operational methods and techniques,



--- Page 89 ---
“a 1. Central Cover Staff (CCS) maintains three domestic
proprietary management companies which provide funding and
operational support for 49 Agency entities, including 13
controlled and directed by CCS.

2. .The three proprietary management companies are
staffed by 9.cmployees; they furnish assistance in the
commercial, business and investment aspects of on~going
operations, manage the legal and commercial affairs of

entities supporting operations, dnd provide cover and
funding channels for operational activities as required.
Most importantly, professional services are furnished in
a manner responsive to required security standards and
at a cost considerably less than would be ‘charged by
bona fide management firms.

. 3. The 13 proprietary entities directed by CCS pro-
vide cover for ten individuals in the United States and
three overseas, Operationally, the companies provide
commercial funding. channels on a world-wide basis and
serve as corporate owricrs of equipment, inventory and
aircraft and as collection mechanisms for outstanding

‘notes and loans in order to conceal U.S. Government

affiliation or interest.



--- Page 90 ---
: - - 7 May 1973

"MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Operations

SUBJECT: Items for Possible Use in Briefing
the DCI .

1. This Memorandum is’ submitted in order to
identify to you for possible bricfing of the
Director activities which in, certain contexts could
be construed as delicate ‘or inappropriate.

2. At the request of the Director of Security,
|. £romfapproximately mid-October 1972 to mid-January
7. 1973'Safesite number 5835 was made available to the
‘FU.S< Marshal's Service for use as a secure residence”
--by an. Assistant U.S. Attorney who reportedly was ~
under threat of assassination by organized criminal
‘elements.

3. SB Division over the past three months has
interviewed four graduate students as prospective
candidates for assignments under American business
cover in the USSR. They were encouraged to locate
cover jobs on their own.

- 4. For approximately two years the SB Division
has ‘had the cooperation of the Commander of the
Morals Division of the District of Columbia Police
Department in training officers scheduled for
assignment to the USSR and Eastern Europe in how to
conduct themselves if placed under arrest, The
arrangement was made through the Office of Security.

5. Since late 1972/cIA]has taken part in seven
FBI training courses at Quantico, Virginia in
“S response to requests from the FBI. We have shared
. \ / with them through lectures and discussions lessons
W we have learned which are relevant to their counter-
espionage responsibilities.

E2 IMPDET
CL BY 059952

y py asses \ 4.

ee La oe - O0G22


--- Page 91 ---
SEI NSITIVE

have been recuited and run exclusively for the MECHAOS
program. Instead, emphasis has been placed on the exploi-
‘ tation of new and old. sAgency assets who have a by-product
capability or a concurrent capability for provision of
information responsive to the program's requirements.
This has involved the provision of custom-tailored collec-
tion requirements and operational guidance. This collec-
tion program is viewed'as an integral part of the recruit-
ment and collection programs of China Operations, Vietnam
Operations, Cuban Operations, Soviet Bloc Division opera-
‘tions and Korean Branch operations. Agents who have an
American "Movement" background.or who have known connec-
tions with the American "Movement" are useful as access
agents to obtain. biographic and personality data, to dis-
cern possible vulnerabilities and susceptibilities, and
to develop operationally exploitable relationships with
recruitment targets of the above programs. These assets
are of interest to our targets because of their connec-
tions with and/or knowledge of the American "Movement."
Over the course of the MHCHAOS program, there have been ~
approxinatcly 20 important areas of operational interest,
which at the present time have been reduced to about ten:
Paris, Stockholm, Brussels, Dar Es Salaam, Conakry, Algiers,
Mexico City, Santiago, Ottawa and Hong Kong.

4. The MIUCHAOS progran a1so utilizes audio opera-
tions, two of which have been implemented to cover tar-
gets: of special interest. ' . :

Paragraph a. deleted because it reveals a sensitive
foreign operation. :

wee oe eee me

Paragraph b, deleted because it reveals a sensitive
Agency foreign operation. i

SEESINE 4 oses



--- Page 92 ---
-5. MHCHAOS reporting from abroad relating to the
program originates in two ways: Individuals who are noted .
in contact with Cubans, the Chinese Communists, etc., and -
who appear to have extremist connections, interests or
background are reported upon. Other individuals are re-
ported upon in response to, specific Headquarters require-
ments received from the FBI because such individuals. are
of active investigatory security interest to the FBI.

6. All cable and dispatch traffic related to the
MHCHAOS program is sent via reStricted channels. It is
not processed by either. the Cable Secretariat or.the In-
formation Services Division. The control and retriev-
ability of information obtained, including information
received from the FBI, is the responsibility of the Spe-
cial Operations Group.

7. Information responsive to specific FBI require-
ments is disseminated to the FBI via special controlled
dissemination chaniels, i.e., by restricted handling cable

traffic or via special pouch and specially numbered blind
memoranda.

8, Infornation of particular significance, when col-
lected, has been disseminated by special memorandum over
the. signature of the Director of Central Intelligence to
the White louse (Dr. Kissinger and John Dean), as well as
to the Attorney Goneral, the Secretary of State and the
Director of the FBI. : :

E OTT wA7
SEN ae von VE Lo, 522
am R . 4


--- Page 93 ---
~ FR 73-183

8 May 1973 _
MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Operations ‘

SUBJECT: - ; Foreign Resources Division Operational
Activities with Possible Flap Potential

REFERENCE: FR Memorandum, 73 180, dated 7 1 May
: 1973, same subject.

1, The answers to your questions are as follows:
a. Question: Do we recruit Americans?
Answer: Yes, we recruit Americans to be
used as-academic supnort assets and access agents.
These Americans are used for spotting and assess-

ment purposes only and do not perform any recruit-
ments,

Paragraph 1, b, and 1. c. are deleted
because they contain sensitive agency ;

operational methods and techniques.

po - ‘E2 IMPDET

CL BY: 057223

Reina vad i

SECRESEISITIVE 006

de
a

ON

i vs

Vs



--- Page 94 ---
d. Question: What is the arrangement re.recruiting’
; out of colleges? Any clearances or prohibitions? ,
. . |
Answer: As of now. CSI 50-10 specifically
requires approval by the,ADDO or DDO for any.
recruitment attempt made in the United States
against an American member of the academic
‘community or a foreign target attending an American
academic institution. This regulation.is presently in
the process of revision in that this approval authority
for academic recruitments in the United States is to
be delegated to Chief, FR. The approval authority
for recruitment aitempts against American students
outside the United States is to be delegated to the Chief
of the appropriate area division, The only prohibitions
_ at the present time are those precluding recruitment
attempts against foreign students here in the United States
on grants from Ford Foundation, Rockefeller or Fulbright.

2. Hf you have further questions, please let me know.

signed/IDEN-173

Acting Chief
Foreign Resources Division

OOSLA

moe ete pee
ree ; ‘

haku Ble pows Sind ba

~
bu



--- Page 95 ---
FR 73-180 .

7 May 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Operations ‘

.

SUBJECT: ‘Foreign Resources Division Operational
Activities with Possible Flap Potential

1, At thr risk of stating the obvious, almost all of the operational

" activities carried on by FR Division in the United States run the risk

that unauthorized disclosure could create embarrassment to the Agency.
We have accepted this as a condition precedent and have proceeded with
our operational activities in the most professional manner possible under
the circuristances. There are certain rather unusual activities in which
FR Division has participated and/or is participating that contain some-
what greater possibility for embarrassment if discovered. Ihave listed
these below, not necessarily in order of embarrassment potential:

JFK CIYLS)

a. \The New York Base|provides a fairly considerable
amount of support to Dr. Kissinger in his contacts with the
Chinese. This support was authorized by Mr, Karamessines
and Mr. Helms, Thus far there has been no problem other

; (S)
than the inordinate amount of time spent by{New York Base JES)
personnel, not to mention the fairly sizeable amount of
money that has been expended in support of these efforts.

b. A CIA Officer is to be assigned to FR Division. The

CIA Officer is presently assigned overseas under deep
: cover:[his cover is the Mullen Corporation, ](This is the cor-] IFEOIE,
{poration that employed E, Howard Hunt, ]In discussions between
'" NOCAD and the ADDO, it was decided that the Officer would
be pulled out and reassigned in the United States.
FR Division was directed to accept this officer for assignment.
\

u.

E2 IMPDET
CL BY: 057223

~ , , — Sa:4
EPRI Cae aR Sey erway . . 00614
& ; RY pe

7

pV ES

» SA dio iy
wdeatsi din dD peru Nada E


--- Page 96 ---
We have concluded that the best solution is to have this

officer attend a university in the Midwest for at least

a year, working towards an advanced degrce until there -
has been time for the situation to clarify itself. We plan

to make no operational use of tite CIA Officer whatsoever,

y , during the period of time that he is attending the’ university.

‘ ‘ Upon completion of his year's study, we will review the .

situation and decide the next course of action at that time.

‘Paragraph I, c, is deleted because it contains sensitive

Agency operational methods and techniques.

d. FR Division has been briefed in general on the jFe Cy)
existence of an audio operation done by the FBI \but with close
yrROY (rsp support}in San Francisco, This operation is directed
against IDEN-62, I understand the operation has
been exceptionally well done. However, the responsibility
for this activity has come from Chief, TSD in conjunction . SPECI )
JEM? with SB Division. .

e. Three microphones were planted in various locations
in the IDEN- 61 by the FBI. [The equipment was pro- Jey «)
duced by CIA and the overall operation was joint, although no
CIA personnel have entered the premises. | The operation was _
deactivated and is presently dormant. The mikes, however,
are still in place. If discovered the operation could cause
‘some embarrassment to the American Governmient, but it is
unlikely the finger would point to CLA,

— ™ . . anna
re “" ee a i Sa 00625
Ss “ soy os nr ary . .

BGC TET Lae

can ure “neh


--- Page 97 ---
SUBJECT: Sensitive activities Perforned by the Office of
- Logistics ;
rn en |
action would be more economical and eliminate the need for
one agency of the Government to duplicate facilities
readily available from another. CA typical example-of this

| procedure is purchasing photointérpretation gear for th
i -Défense Intelligence Agency element located at NPIC? Tn

“connection with the current reporting requirement, however,

I have had our records researched for the past 2 years and
Attachnent 1 reflects those transactions which appear to be
relevant to the subject of this memorandum. .

d. In connection with the disclosures during the sum-
mer of 1971 that the Rand Corporation was not, properly
safeguarding classified documents, this Office undertook
two acts. I directed the Secnritwiéficer from our: West
Coast Procurement Office at the Iden 87 _,

to visit the Rand Corporation and satisfy
himself that classified material furnished them by the
ee CAgency3was both properly safeguarded and accounted for.
ch) His report was affirmative. On 23 August 1971, the senior
es Security. Officer assigned to this Office forwarded a
letter to the Rand Corporation stressing and reaffirming
the procedures Rand must follow in safeguarding classified
information furnished then by{the Agency J Of residual
_ interest in this matter, there is summarized the contents
of a memorandum of 2 July 1971 to theCExecutive Director-
Comptroller from the DD/I which is in our possession,}:

This memorandum reports that BIS regularly
p) disseminated reports to the Rand Corporation]
Age but that instructions had been issued to cease
distribution of classified reports. While no
other direct dissemination went to Rand, other
. USIB agencies, primarily USAF, were passing
| " "many" copies ofMD/1 products to Rand] as au-

thorized under USIB regulations. The memoran-
dum also states that Rand personnel had ~
requested searches and document retrieval from
the CRS facility. ‘

Ss. In connection with action taken for the office of
Security, there are three relevant items:
2
. @. The Printing Services Division, OL, was requested
bY the Office o£,Security to print a book written by
on St Office of Security. The book was pre-
ky pnder a Brookings Institution Federal

Fe

re OR
renee ve v8 ggaaa.



--- Page 98 ---
|

Sensitive
Logistics

\ ® @

| . : : tose. .
the/ DD/0,)we will not honor any requisition fer surveil-
lance equipment unless it has been approved ty the CI

Staff of the£DD/0) Tae , :

4; Within the area of contractual responsibilities, the
following items are pertinent:

SUBJECT: ztivities Performed by tk Office of

\) a. In February 1971,[Colonel L. XK. white] the then
N\A Executive Director-Comptroller, called me t ttend a
meeting in his office, also attended by Mr. William Colby.
4) ‘Colonel White explained that the Technical Services
: Division (TSD) had been requested to provide assistance
i to the FBI for a sensitive ject ° .
’ toot (Ze) »[ cotones white) did not dis-
sy close the purpose of the asSistance being provided by TSD
but did instruct me to assist TSD on purely contractual
v matters. Since the Office of Logistics has-no inzormation
concerning the mission or purpose of Project .- sub-
Stantive questions concerning the subject should he
addressed te TSD. Other procurement actions accomplished
for the .FBl-are..revorted below, Specific mention is made,
howéver, of the Project because of the dollar magnitude, ap-
proximately $1 million, and the complex technical equip-
. ment that has. been involved in the undertaking.

b. The Procurement Division, OL, currently has two
requisitions in hand from TSD which would involve reim-
bursable sales to the FBI. One such requisition in the

! amount of $56,900 is for two Westinghouse. television
cameras. The second requisition in the amount of $11,200
is for two wide-angle surveillance probes manufactured by
Bausch and Lomb. No action is being taken on either of
these requirements pending further instructions which-
will be sought from the Deputy Director for Management
and Services. / a

. c. Over the years, thisfAgency] has often supported
4 ri other Government agencies from a contractual or materiel
AW Standpoint. Upon the submission of an officially approved é)

“request, supported by a transfer of funds,Cthe Agency/ d
would either enter into "accommodation procurements" for
the requesting agency or support the requesting agency by
the issuance of materiel from stock. Such actions are
legally accomplished under the Economy Act of 1925. - This

' Act authorizes one agency to support the needs of, or pro-
Vide a service for, another Government agency when such

EYES ONLY =v _
SECRET Te, 0088S



--- Page 99 ---
SUBJECT: Sensitive Activities Performed by the Office of
: Logistics — . ;

_ Executive Fellowship. --.The book is entitled "Where's
What -- Sources of Information for Federal Investigators."
It is a full treatise on the existence of sources of in-
formation that may be useful to an investigator. The
<p) book's first printing cf 3060 copies was made in June 1967.
\ Due to demand, a second printing of 609 copies was made
in September 1968... The. jitle page of the book gives
attribution tof se mteine tty Office of Security J Central
Intelligence Agency, and the Brookings Institution Federal
Executive Fellowsht The book is classified Confidential,
and it is our understanding that the distribution was made
to appropriate,agencies of the Federal Government. A copy
eet Murphy" book can be made available for review if
esired. . .

Sometime in 1972, a representative ' of the Law
Enforcement Assistance Administration (LEAA). requested
that the Agency give-consideration to ovr publishing, at
b\ LEAA expense, an unclassified version of this volume. It
\) was the ‘intent of LEAA to make broad-scale distribution
ke to Police Departments throughout the country. The Director
4 ' of Security and I consulted on this matter and jointly
' determined that the LEAA request should not -be honored be-
cause({the Agencyshould not put itself in the position of
publishing law enforcement material for general and un- -
Classified purposes, and it would be an abuse of our print-
ing facilities.

b. On 5 January 1971, the Director of Security re-
quested that I approve his leasing up to eleven:motor
vehicles for use in connection with a special support.
operation which would last approximately 3 months. The
Director of Security informed me, in his requesting memo -
randum of 5 January 1971, that "This support activity has

_ been undertaken at the specific instruction of the Director
-and has his personal approval." The request was approved,

c. From 1968 to date, the Office of Security has
" requisitioned: from this Office a considerable amount of
/ materiel which we understand was to be given or loaned by
d) them to local Police Departments, In certain_cases some
V of this materiel was issued froma ency stocksJand, in
Other cases, direct procurement of the materiel was made

-by funds furnished by ‘the Office of Security. <A complete
listing of such materiel is found in Attachment 2. :

SECRET ico


--- Page 100 ---
==

SUBJECT: Sensitive activities Performed by the Office of
‘Logistics , oe

6. In connection with the responsibility held by this

Office to obtain, manage, and dispose of safe sites for all

Agency operating components , the following information is
relevant. .

a. A safe Gite, identified as "Safehouse 562" which
is Iden 88 .
; was made available to General Cushman’ Ss
office on 25 July 1971. .
The subject safe site was acquired on 15 June 1970
as a replacement for a terminated OL standby safe site
and in keeping with the approved requirement for a com-
plement of five standby safehouses for all Agency use.
The apartment has one bedroom and is located in an older
high-rise building along Iden 89, The nominal
lessce is Iden 90 2 security-cleared
attorney with offices located at Iden 91 .
. - The cover story utilized is that
Iden 90,. * rents the apartment for business conferences,
_meetings, and occasional overnight ‘stays by his. staff
and/or his out-of-town clients. The original lease term
was for a l-year period, 15 June 1970 to 14 June 1971,
with month-to-month renewals thereafter. As an OL standby
safe site, the apartment has been used by various. Agency
components to meet their short-term or crash requirements.
Control of the standby. safe site and its security is the
responsibility of this Office, A record is maintained of
each user, component, and date of use; however, no record
is made of those persons being met at the site nor for what
purpose the site is being used (meetings, training, etc.).
Such information is maintained by the operating component
requesting the safe site. Records maintained by this
. Office disclose only that the apartment involved was made
; available to General Cushman's office on 25 July 1971 in
\ _ answer to a telephonic request.

b. This Office is aware, although it had no cognizance
_ mor responsibility, that an apartment was rented in Miami
Beach, Florida, during the period of the Democratic National
Convention, 10-14 July 1972, and the Republican National ,
Convention, 21-24 August 1972. The apartment was used as

a meeting place for officers of the Miami Station who were
_in liaison with members of the Secret Service and rendering

6 o. ;
EYES ONLY (ou, a
SECRE! + | _ 1, 00425



--- Page 101 ---
— ee tae et wel

SUBJECT: Sensitive Activities Performed by the Office of
. Logistics

assistance in connection with the political conventions
that were being held. -WH Division is the cognizant
operating component on this matter.

of my knowledge and memory, those matters which appear to be
relevant to subject tasking given by the Director.
: ry : . . . .

. John F, Blake ~
: . : Director of Logistics

2 Atts ; , . o
ec: DD/MgS

EYES, OF ie as
SECRET | |


--- Page 102 ---
TSULUREP oS

EVES ORLY :

Requesting Date of St ' Y.S. Depart
Office. Request Item ' Quantity Unit Cost ment or Agen

Os 3/23/72 Telephone Analyzer — , . ol . 1,350 BNDD .
TSD - 5/16/72 Transmitters, Radio Beacon , 8. 313090 BNDD
os . 3/23/72 Telephone Analyzer mo, 1 "41,350 it White House |
: ; . ““Communicatio
. , Aceon
os . 3/23/72 Telephone Analyzers | “413 1,400 _ Air Force
os 3/23/72 Telephone Analyzers vee “10 1,350 'State |
os . 3/23/72 Telephone Analyzers os 2 . 1,375. AEC _
TSD -—«s-41/16/72 Camera Sets 29 656 EBT
TSD 4/17/72 Camera Sets . 10 700 FBI
TSD 11/18/71 Actuators, Recorders Se 50 488 - FBI
'TSD 4/19/72‘ Tessina Cameras , a 3 700 - BNDD
TSD -" 12/7/72 Camera, Video on , “1 18,045 FBI @&

“TSD. 10/13/72. Tube, Image, Burn-Resistance, ‘1 . 4,639 . FBI
“ - Equivalent of W'L 30691

TSD 3/26/71 Tubes, Image, WL 30691 - 2 ‘4,607, FBI
4/20/73

Cameras, Television

WIA
SENS |



--- Page 103 ---
CtrrToeo

Requesting

Office

TSD
TSD
TSD

‘" TSD
TSD
- -TSD.

. TSD

OL
“Os
OL

TSD

TSD

Date of-
Request

12/14/72
10/20/72
10/13/72

5/26/71
4/22/71
4/22/71
4/22/71
2/25/71

/1/30/71

8/12/70

1/10/73
6/28/72

7/26/71

Item _—

Transmitters, Radio
Actuators, Recorder =.

Tube, Image, Burn-Resistance,
Equivalent of WL 30691"

Tube, Image, WL 30691

‘Transmitters ’

Module, Plug-In
Power Supply '- UWP-39A

"Telephone Analyzers

Telephone Analyzers

Cable, Special-Purpose
Electrical ;

Ink, Special Formula
Ink, Special Formula
Transmitter, Radio Beacon

EVES ONLY

CVCDLT

Quantity © Unit Cost
3 313

25 591
1 - 4,639

4,639
1,372
1,247
: * $68
1,350
1,350

nv N YY YF BW N

342
1;825
3,700

1 . 728

2

Receiving |
U.S. Depart:

ment or Agenc
BNDD

FBI ; .
FBI

FBI
FBI:

e

‘ppt
FBI

Treasury

Treasury

White House
Communication
Agency

ini ion a
Naturalizatio
Service

Immigration
Naturalizatio
Service

U.S. Forestry


--- Page 104 ---
FCS- 594+ a

11 Bat 37 73

| TEGO Ls
td i

MEMORANDUM FOR: Director, Central Intelligence Agency

THROUGH : Deputy Director for Management and Services’
SUBJECT : Activities which might be considered sensitive
issues, . .

' Thave listed below computer processing projects which the Office of
Joint Computer Support has participated in or is aware of and which
might be considered sensitive issues. :

- Most Sensitive Projects ° - — ™
OJCS ' Project Officer Nature — ~ Orcs

Project . Organization, & of Reason for
Identification Telephone Project. : Listing

‘Letpee) Richard Ober A special pro- Type of
: CI Staff ject initiated data being
Red 1465 by DCI _ _ tollected,
(_sance | Iden 48 _ Machine Ss Type of
, : OS" index to data in
“Red 9298 security files - index.
Lonerar} (.SohnHutchings] Information. Type of
ORD ‘storage & re- data in
3061. trieval of drug files.

related data

ee project /

. Sensitive Projects ©

Tpruces) iden 18 Computer file Type of
OMS of drug data, data in
7792 . ree

EYES ONLY
SECRET .


--- Page 105 ---
* Sensitive Projects (Continued)

Oscs .
. Project ~&
Identifica@H:

- ‘PROPHSES-

a

Sensitivity Unknown, but.Possibly a Matter for Concern

TILAQ-

SPYDER

DMVREC—

-  APREEIN

SECRET

Project Officer
Organization, &
Telephone

~ seni
TSD

. 362-1922

(sterile)

S

Robert Hah
SB uo
Red 1185/
1251

Iden 48

Os
Red 9298

Walter-
Kowalski

Cl Staff

Red 9338

Nature
of pf

ProiWw

Statistical :
analysis of
psychological

. data,

Pattern.
analysis of
surveillance

data from
foreign liaison

service

Data on

' radio frequen-

cies used for
support of In-

PileceMenitor- -

ing-System,, a

system to identify

unauthorized
transmitters.

File of auto-
mobile license
numbers.

File of Agency
applicants who
were not
hired.

: niques of

OJCS,
Reason for
List ing

Source of

data. Con-
tractors are
involved
with project,

Nature of
data. Tech-

system dis-
cussed with
FBI,

Project
originated by
James McCord,

Nature of
data.

Nature of
data. |


--- Page 106 ---
. Sensitivity Unknovm, but Possiblv a Matter for Concern (Continued)

oOgCcS . Project Officer. Nature orcs
Project & Organization, & of é Reason for
Identification Telephone Proje — Listing
on Iden 187 : Cooperative Association
‘ ISD/DDO program with with the
ss “Red 1442 . Iden 188 . named
: . ‘ . ' organization,
s
. Lin
* name grouping
techniques.

| Daye Chins
fe

- JOHN D, LAMS
Director of Joint Computer Support

3
\
; ‘
EYES ONLY. goasy



--- Page 107 ---
a . _ . a.
.
?

29 May 1973 Ce

MEMORANDUM FOR: Inspector General

SUBJECT. :Mr.Colby's Request to Inspector General to
Determine Sudject Referred to by Two Notes
‘ina PP/B Memo to DD/M&S

REFERENCE : D/PPB Memo to DD/M&S dated 23 May 1973,
. Subject: Watergate Principals - Direct or
Indirect Involvement :

: 1. The two notes of 13 and 20 January 1972 refer to approval

ii by the DCI (at that time Mr. Helms) for the expenditure of $30-32K

} for a sensitive CS project. No further details were given, Mr. Colby
asked that DDO records be checked.

y 2. .DDO records show that the funds went to the CI Staff for a
: -project called Iden 99, This is a joint operation with the Iden 100
service for the collection of BLINT intelligence. The activity is
handled by the Special Intelligence Group of the. CI Staff.

°3.. The funds cited in the notes was transferred to Cl on
13 January 1972. :It is believed by DDO/MPS and the CI Staff thar
the two notes refer to the same appropriated amount,ie., ‘$30 to 32K
and not to two scparate allocations. :



--- Page 108 ---
“focal points were Iden 32 and Iden 3; f understand

also,

' MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Management and Services

SUEJECT: _ Watergate Principals - Direct or Indirect
Involvement :

1. This memorandum responds to the Director' s request for
a report of any involvement in any capacity since ] January 1969
with Messrs. Hunt, McCord, Liddy, Young, or Krogh.

2. I have had none with Hunt, Liddy or Young. :

3. My McCord contact was indirect and occurred sometime
during ‘the late 1960's when I was. Director, Office of Computer -

Services. _[ epposed plans for Technical Division, Office of

Security (under Mr. McCord) to acquire a separate computer fer
Iden 101. : Ted Hines of DN/S2T (then ORD)
was the computer individual working with TD and, I think, would
have details.

4. The Krogh contact also was indirect and involved his “
request, first throush OMB, that CIA fund forcign travel on behalf
of the Cabinet Co:smittee on International Narcetics Control. Indi- |
i: vidual phone -discussions are noted in the attached. The Agency

Iden 3 has forwarded relevant documentation. Copies of
memoranda from Messrs. Krogh, Iden 3 and Colby are attached

°

5. I held a staff-meeting yes terday to pass the request to
ali OPPB employees. One officer who was attending 2 a funeral will
not be available until temorrow,

O\DBE CVE TBEa ear tg90(S3779A 42
; J - D\ESR EAL? OMIA EY

; J- R'E coped
Ouse ga - Soon 232268"

/s/ Charles A. Briggs
Charles A.’ Briggs

piemipavon: Director of Planning,
rn rogramming, end: budgeting -
hs stated ah 00849.

7
ELS IMPOET CL aY.. Cllla:

es

~_senet Bae

V


--- Page 109 ---
.- | a x} - AQ amen:

' , 23 May 1773

4 Feb 72 Call from Jin Taylor, OM2Z re "Bud? Krogh-and his deputy,
, Walter’ Minnick, of the Domestic Council who plan fereizn
travel in connection with their narcotics interests. Jim was
alerting us to their intention to ask us for, funds for the
‘travel, : of .

.
7 Feb 72_ Follow-up from Taylor: Plan 3- 5 trips fcr 3 individuals--
all in FY 72. Cost probably SICK. Minnick ready tu make

, first trip. Iden 32 is plugged in. ExDir said OX re Tehran

! . "visit. -

7 Feb. 72 See attached memo frem Egil hrogh, Jr. fo Bill Colby and

: oe follow-on memos from ‘Seymour Bolton (21 Jul 72) and Colby
| . (2 Aug 72).

12(?) May 72 John Hurley, OMB called, menticning possible Krogh/
Minnick attendance at-a Latin Armerican Jden 102
i conference on narcotics. He also said Jeif Shepherd.
* “White House, was laying on a ‘ars withiden 32 for
himself, Shepherd and Mark Alger, OMB to Eurepe.

23 Jun 72 Iden 3 "commented on Krogh/i Minnick interest
| : in getting CA activitics, including large-scale Ph
, on narcotics front, Iden 3 pushing small-scale ‘pe.
6 Jul 72 Tden 3 called. Notes say only: "Minnick- urley film.

We will send."
Z Aug 72 Iden 3 called re Colby letter (attached). Safd travel
! . orders ready; need money this. Ff (No record in my
! “notes as to who wus traveling when, but have faint
: recolicction of its being to Mexico City). Sam Hines
and, Iden 73. contacted by Iden 3,

; . , oot
1 Nov 72 Related? Iden 3 ‘call. Again notes are cryptic:
a WH/GAO-Grace (Iden 32)-: Survey BNDD problems/
Mexico,* .
. ° ‘. . 001590

——e —— =~


--- Page 110 ---
1B Jan 72

_20 Jan 72

t

On Mr. Colby's copy only:

ExDir (Colby) said DCI had approv ed $30x for sensitive _ |
cs Project - no details. 1]

Reminded ExDir re $32K he said DCI OK'd,

SECRET



--- Page 111 ---
prey

. a | o CO 19 1o7z _

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

SUBJECT: ‘Conversation win Teck Bauman] TREAD

t .

\) 1. While on leave visiting Disney World in Florida, I .
()Adaropped in to seq 7ack Baumanj)who lives in Winterhaven, Florida.-
. Clack etired fromthe AgencyJabout five years ago on disability due

‘. to.a Serious heart condition, He was with the Office of Security for
about 20 years prior to his retirement. . .

‘

. . »\ 2. During a private conversation{Jack}tolé me that he had
be

; yh e interviewe three or four times by the FBI in connection with .
ie thel McCord Hua affair, ITasked him why he. had’ been interviewed,

and he told me that in late 1971 he had béen contacted by Howard
Hunt who suggested that he consider an_assignment as Security
Officer for the Republican Party, Cyackisited Washington in
January 1972 to discuss the proposed position with Howard Hunt
who apparently was acting oa behalf of the Republican Party. (sack?
furnished a resume to Hunt and discussed the position with him. _
Ultimately, he decided not to accept the position because he felt
that his heart condition would not allow him to become involved in
such activity. - ; ;

_ 3. According tolJackP during the meeting with Mr. Hunt
they discussed some of the requirements of the job. At that time
they discussed a need for both a positive and a counteraudio program
w and a need for a good security system both before and during the :

’ National Convention, (Jack}indicated that he sincerely believed that
7 . the Republican Party did feed a security officer. and a good security”
- programmer but felt that he could not afford to accept the job even.

though it was a very lucrative offer Apparently, money was nota
hoo problem, : . ;

eS



--- Page 112 ---
gb, ri Hunt a:

4, vhenGige))decined, he indicated thyM Mr. Hunt asked
J for any other rec(jmendations he might have. Wiccording tofJack)
he told Mr. Hunt that most of the Peopls he knew were still in the |
Gigenc but he did furnish the name of WEN-lus who might be
possibly ready to retire from thefAg gency.

: y : 5.(JacH informed + ame that he assumed that the Bureau
\\ obtained his name due to the resume he furnished. Mr. Hunt. He
ie ~ said that the Bureau had talked to him on three or four occasions
- +‘ and that he had written up about a 40 page statement concerning
his dealings with Mr. Hunt. When asked about Mr. McCord (Jack)
said that he really did not know McCord that well and declined any
knowledge of Mr. McCord's technical capability.
CY ' TT
: 6. ‘Mr, Bauman indicated that he had not been in touch
with Mr, Hunt since the early part of 1972 and knew aothing of
. the Watergate operation. He stated that he had gained the impres-
, sion from the Bureau interview that the technical devices were being
removed at the time of the arrest and were not being installed as
originally reported,

a 7. AU of the above information was volunteered by Mr.
i: (Bauman,) and I really did not get involved in any discussion on the
| (V%. matter other than to comment that I hated to see theCAgency'g name
wy) connected with such an incident in any way. The above conversation
took place during a 10 or 15 minute period and no other discussion
relating to this incident was held. itis being reported for the record
_ and for information of the Director of Security.

: oe - : os regal Be ZED S. -

tle oe

ee or een eens



--- Page 113 ---
\
rf DD/M&S 73-1809 -S -

MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Management and Services

SUBJECT . + : Contacts with Individuals Named in the Watergate Matter

p) 1. Iam addressing this to you instead of to the{Director of Central

. _Intelligence kince I doubt that the information contained herein is of such
: yo significance to warrant his interest and because it has been on record with
4 thd Agenc Psince July 1972. However, if you.feel.that the information is of
such interest that it should be forwarded to the Director I shall put it in the
. proper format to do so. ,

~

h) 2. My only contact with anyone named in connection with the
: \ M) “Watergate and related matters was throug Mir.- Jack Bauman a former
A Agency employee now retired and living in Winterhaven, Florida} In

J December 197i( Mr. Baumanjcalled me from Florida and advised that he
, wanted to get in touch with Howard Hunt. He said that he did not have Hunt's
home phone number and that it was probably unlisted but that since Hunt was a
former employee, ‘could I contact Hunt and ask him to give{Mr. ‘Baumap)a call.
Thad only met Hunt once about 10 years before but I agreed to relay the message.
Icalled Howard Hunt at his home and told him-thadMr. Bauman/did not have his
home phone and requested he call Mr. Bauman.} Mx. Hunt thanked me for
relaying the message and said that he would c&ll/Mr. BaumagA This seemed of
little consequence to me in December 1971 but in July 1972 Iden 17 of the
Office of Security contacted me in regard to the FBI investigation of the Watergate
Situation. At that time linformed Iden 17 ‘of the telephone call from
Mr. Bauman) in December 1971. Attached is a copy of a:Memorandum for the
Record prepared by Iden 17 as a result of our conversation.

; ; ») _ 8. Inthe summer of 1972 1 took my family to Disney World in Florida

ny and took that occasion to drop in to sed Jack Baumap) (mr. Baumay)told me in

/\ ie a private Conversation that he had been interviewed three or four times by the
% FBI in connection with the Watergate affair and he related to me his contact

mea any > QEOPRE ee ampoer en eG 11018
BILD Gay PRR



--- Page 114 ---
(2)

with Howard Hunt. On 19 July 1972 after my return from Florida I reported
this conversation to the Director of Security and made it a Memorandum for

the Record. This memorandum was sent to Mr. Colby anda copy of the
memorandum is attached,

4, Other than knowing Mr. McCord through his employment with

| Athe Agency\and meeting Howard Hunt once in about 1959, I do not know nor
| 50) _ have [had any contdct with any individuals named or knowledge of related
ct matters now receiving attention in the press.

“Lee
Lie Fe
en W. Kane °

Special Assistant to the
Deputy Director
for Management and Services

a

_ Atts ©



--- Page 115 ---
a a, @ an 17 July 197
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD. , . an a
SUBJECT: Charles We. ae -JFKU Oe) -_ .
“Iden 108
“8
ae 1, Last week Special Agent Arnold Parham of the FBI con-

LN A Q) . tacted the Acting DD/OS, He asked whether or net the Subjects
) - worked for the Central Intelligence Agency.| Previously, requests
of this nature were followed UP by the FBIWith an interview of the
subjects. .
: : 2. Ibriefed Mr. Colby who is the Agency's focal point on |
7 the "Watergate" case and the Acting DD/S of the FBI inquiry.
; Mr. Colby suggested that we determine the extent of involvement
“| and indicated that we advise the Bureau of their employment.

YK / f . 3. When Agent Parham was again contacted and lavieea
Oy

of the Subjects’ -employment with{ the Agency,) he indicated that
Cy the Bureau does not wish to interview them, | : Gbrcets a
‘4, The office of the DD/PS will interview Iden 108 in Zhu iets
the same fashion as Mr. True was previously interviewed, g 7/2 ‘

5. J called/Mr. Kane)both 2 at his office and his residence -

“and leayned that he is in Florida and will return to duty on 17 July.
i salle Mr. Kane)this morning to advise him of the inquiry.

° \ 7.6, (xe. Keng stated that he has no firm conclusion as to
-~ how the Bureau obtained his name. He stated that he has‘seen

| iA Mr. Hunt’oa only one occasion in 1959. At that time Hunt was _

8) .the Chief of Station, Montevideo. The meeting was occasioned

1



--- Page 116 ---
: ny by the fact tha Mey ane pccompanied a a Lechateggevey team
/ to,the Montevideo o: 7 Mr. Kang] stated further that around

Christmas time of 1971 h Me. Kang] call from(Jack Beumaa>
who Keng to get in touch with Mr.: Hunt. (Mr. Beumanpsked

|

. ‘Kane/how he could get in touch with him. /Mr. Kane pbtained
Mi. Hunt's telephone number through telephone information channels
whereupon ‘he passed the number on to{Mr, Baurnans) .

: Kane}stated that he has information that(Jeck. Baumap>
has ail othe on several occasions in connection with the

‘current investigation and that he surmises that the Bureau may
have obtained his name from him. 7

ay

signed Iden 17

Deputy Director of Security



--- Page 117 ---
———————

te . | SECRET/SENSITIVE

_ @

8 May 1973

ay a . .
MEMORANDUM FOR:: Director of Central Intelligence

THROUGH: Deputy Director for Management and Services

. ‘ . ‘
SUBJECT: Involvement in Sensitive Domestic Activities

; 1. As chief of the DDP Systems Group prior to 1969, I was involved
H - in providing data processing support for the following sensitive projects:

aoe

/

of U.S. citizens believed to.be militants, subversives, terrorists; 3

e a. Cl Staff - Mr. Richard Ober's program for processing data o)
(ss

| VO b. FI Staff and Office of Medical Services program
A for recording data on foreign and U.S. phy sicians from American
Medical Association records.

ec. A Systems Group sponsored program of common concern
listing travel of U.S. citizens to and from Communist countries.

2. In the same capacity my staff and I briefed police officers from _
_New York State and Chicago at the DCI's request (Admiral Rayborn) on
. “@ata processing techniques related to biographic intelligence (unclassified).

3. As a member of O/PPB, I have been aware of five programs with
possibly sensitive domestic overtones.

a. DDS&T/ORD's contract with the University Iden 103
for "The VIP Health and Behavior Prediction
System. " .

) b. DDS&T/ORD's Project “which involved the collection
of data on dangerous drugs from U.S. firms. I believe Mr. Helms
‘ terminated this program last Fall. ~ : 4



--- Page 118 ---
ira

CONFIDS. TIAL En2

1@.y 11973

CT

eo
te
Dar
te
o

_ . . .
Research Project on Rotert Vesco .

2. On 15 Getoter 1979 jies serg) treckinridge end eintrelne ny

in the course of s Survey, were triéfed on activitiss of the

Atlsntic/Pacific Division of tne. Offi ice of Econemic aeoorts.: One
project cited was a covery from the Uirectur, apsarentl; at the re-
quest of Secretery Smite, to the effect, "What do we xnow ebovt

+e

_Vesco," the man then renning IOS. Tro of OCK's anal sts were arsjened

to: the project and, werking through the. ucmestic Contect vervice, .

“spent a dey going over tre files of the Securities and Exchange
‘Commission. There apnarently was sone. contact also with ZUR Division

of the Leputy Directorate for Plans and with the Office of Current
Intelligence.

2. The information atove is based on rough notes and obviously
is sketchy. It is cited nos not to suzzest any wrongdoing but because
of the current oullicity avout Yesco end the pr Leki lity of continuing
probes’ into the subject ty the press end the courts.

Scott D. Preckinridg ze

rel re A) ae Henry feinteetoan)



--- Page 119 ---
MEMORANDUM FOR: Inspector General

@ : 22 MafQe73 ; .
|

Bill--

" Attached are the reports Bill Colby asked to see:

1.. Restless Youth (September 1968), No, 0613/68,
Secret/Sensitive/No Foreign Dissem (Copy 78).

This documeént was produced in two versions --one oy
. with the chapter on radical students in America (pages , :

hrs, °°, + 25-39) which was sent only to the President, Walt Rostow,

and Cy Vance (former Deputy Secretary of Defense); the

other version without the references to the American

scene was disseminated.to twenty people outside the

Agency. This document without the material on the

US was updated in February 1969 and copies were sent:

to the Vice President and Dr. Kissinger, A still more

abbreviated edition was sent to the Attorney General

in March 1969. - at

2, Black Radicalism in the Caribbean (6 August 1969),
‘No, 1839/69, Secret/No Foreign Dissem (Copy 142),

8, Black Radicalism in the Caribbean--Another Look
. “2 June 1970), No.. 0517/70, Secret/No Foreign '
Dissem (Copy 98).

\

. Please note that these are our record copies and should.
- be returned. : :

“ Edward W. Proctor

an
yf Te, /-s _ Deputy Director for Intelligence
Attachments a oF .
FM
SECRET /SENSITIVE | |

. sy
Pet a nee. vo

Satiumnemenact och hancement

\ -_



--- Page 120 ---


--- Page 121 ---
; CIA INTERNAL USE ONLY
! a © | 6

8 May ‘1973

MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Central Intelligence

FROM , oho Deputy Director for Intelligence ;
SUBJECT : Activities Possibly vesie[ ce
Legislative Charter

report any activities which might be considered outside CIA's
legislative charter.

soe. 1, This memorandum responds to your instruction to — os

ns

2, All Office and Staff chiefs in the Intelligence Directorate
have reviewed the past and present activitics of their components,
Thave received responses from all of them, and none reported any
activities related to cither the Watergate affair or the break into
the offices of Elisberg's psychiatrist. Although contacts with
three of the people allegedly implicated in these incidents were
reported, these contacts were on matters other than the two
improner activities:

Hunt: - Col, White, Richard Lehman, and I talked
to Hunt in late 1970 regarding his preparation ©
of a recommendation in support of the Agency's
nomination of R. Jack Smith for the National
Civil Service League Award.

Mitchellr While Mr. Mitchell was Attorney General,
an OCI officer was assigned the task of

providing him with daily briefings on
foreign developments. ;

i Bleliele =, Geeiselif pel

fh.
DB.

H

Cer ifs 3 rey Syemeo

_ ABPRAMET | ran Dy Paar gong

Cts bes, Ueaurd retey MACS

\ Gs tabpel hl sex)

a

-

ee ,
CIA INTERNAL USE ONLY.



--- Page 122 ---
Harry Eisenbeiss and Clarus Rice of CRS
-had frequent contacts with Young during the
summer. of 1972 in connection with Executive
. Order 11652 and the implementing NSC
. directive, This involved visits by Young
to CIA to discuss information storage and
retrieval and several meetings of an inter-
, 28ency group dealing with the implementation
“ of the Executive Order and directive.
ee BS In accordance with my instructions, several Offices reported |
*..domestic activities which might appear questionable to outsiders.
..Thour responses are attached, Most of these activities are clearly
-t Within the Agency's charter, but there are a few which could be
- viewed as borderline.

- DCS collects information on foreign students studying
in the US.

7 pcs collects information on physicians practicing in
the US who have studied abroad (mostly foreign
nationals).

~ DCS accepts information on possible foreign
involvement in US dissident groups and on the
‘narcotics trade when sources refuse to deal
with.the FBI and BNDD directly.

ited DCS assesses the suitability and willingness of
US citizens to cooperate with CIA.

- DCS, for six months in late 1972 and early 1973,
was acquiring telephone routing slips on overseas
calls. : en a. . -f. s

-— Information deleted because it reveals sensitive operational
techniques and methods,

- NPIC and COMIREX review satellite imagery
from NASA programs to identify photography |
too "sensitive" for public release,

-2-

CIA INTERNAL USE ONLY



--- Page 123 ---
Attachments

NPIC. has examined domestic coverage for special
purposes such as natur al. éalastrophies and. eivil
disturbances,

OCI, in 1967 and 1968, prepared intelligence
memoranda on possible foreign connections-with
the US anti-war movement and world-wide student
dissidence (including the SDS) at the request of
the White House,

CRS is regularly involved with Customs in examining
the contents of motion picture film cans addressed to
the Soviet, and occasionally other forcign, embassies
to acquire positive foreign intelligence,

FBIS has on occasion supplied linguists to work
directly for another agency, ¢.g., to the FI3I to
_- translate Arabic in Washington, :

FBIS monitors. radio press dispatches and reports
covered by copyright. These are circulated within
the Government and stamped "Official Use Only".

This has gone on for three decades without problems.

FBIS has monitored and reported on foreign radio

- hroadcasts of statements and speeches of US citizens
such.as those by US POWs in Hanoi, Jane Fonda,
and Ramsey Clarke,

FBIS has run the Joint Publication Research Service
under Depariment‘of Commerce cover since 1957,
JPRS is a facility for obtaining translations of '
unclassified publications in foreign languages

and contracts with private individuals to do this
work. Most of these individuals are not witting.

of the CIA-JPRS relationship,

Chen rbd t Do
: EDWARD W. PROCTOR
Deputy Director for Intelligence |

-3-

:

hy
Sd

cmmeiale 7 09487

CIA INTERNAL USE ONLY


--- Page 124 ---
SECRET
e INTERNAL USE ONLY

‘7 May 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Central Intelligence.”

VIA "Deputy Director for Intelligence
t
FROM ; Director of Current Intelligence

SUBJECT Activity Related to Domestic Events

1. OCI began following Caribbean black radicalism
in earnest in 1968, The emphasis of our analysis was on
black nationalism as a political force in the Caribbean
and as a threat to the security of the Caribbean statos.
Two-DDI memoranda were produced on the subject: "Black
Radicalism in the Caribbean" (6 August 1969), and "Black

"= Radicalism in the Caribbean-~-Another Look" (12 June 1970).
‘In each a single paragraph was devotcd to ties with the

US black power movement; the discussion primarily concerned
visits of Stokely Carmichael and other US black. power

activists to the Caribbean and other. overt contacts.

2. In June 1970, Archer Bush of OCI was asked to

_ write a memorandum with special attention to links be-
tween black radicalism in the Caribbean and advocates of
black power in the US. The record is not clear where

this request originated, but it came through channels

») from the DCI. The paper was to be treated as especially
' sensitive.and was to include material provided by the
, Special Operations group of the CI Staff. The CI Staff

material was voluminous but did not provide’ meaningful
evidence of important links between militant blacks in

the US and the Caribbean. This, in fact, was one of

the conclusions of the paper. The memorandum was produced
in typescript form and given to the DCI.

SECRET,
CIA INTERNAL USE ONLY:



--- Page 125 ---
. . SECRET —_
STA INTERNAL USE ONLY 6

3. For several months in the first half o£f:1968
the! Caribhean Branch wrote periodic tyoescript memoranda
on Stokely Carmichael's travels abroad during a period
‘when he had dropped out of public view. Our recollection
dis that the memoranda were for internal CIA use ‘only,

’ although a copy of one was inadvertently sent to the FBI.

‘es

. , WV,
: Richard Lehman.
Director of Current Intelligence

SECRET
CIA INTERNAL USE ONLY

0018


--- Page 126 ---
7 ; o . é | : : . ‘

~ ot 7 May 1973

‘ MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Intelligence

SUBJECT: DCS Domestic Activity

; pind) To the best of my knowledge, DCS has not engaged in any

4 . activity outside the CIA charter or that could be construed as
/ gllewal. Some of the functions that we perform under HR 1-13f
4 (1) of providing operational support within the US to all .
| id elements of CIA and to the USIB-member agencies, however, are
‘ perhaps borderline or could be construed as illegal if mis-

interpreted. For example:

H

1. Provide personality and assessment data on certain
foreign students and visiting foreign scientists and
officials, : “

2. Identify foreign students in the US through collection
of foreign student lists from certain universities,

3, Provide personality and assessment data on US citizens
to determine their suitability and willingness to
cooperate with the Agency.

4. Introduce cooperative US businessmen and academicians.
- to Agency personnel who are in alias but using CIA

exedentials. .

7 - + & Collect information on possible foreign involvement. -

\ or penctration of US dissident groups, but only in a
passive manner and only when the source has refused
to pass the information directly to the FBI.

6, Collect information on the narcotics trade, but again
only in a passive manner when the source has refused to
pass the information directly -to BNDD or the FBI,

\

0028.4

QL aMPaer cu ny004 176

sepet EE TO

2 “Ye
om Get oy
Ueiin

: and
Lerernses © © G3



--- Page 127 ---
Ranier
SUBJECT: “pes Domestic Activity

7. Collect specific ‘information. and supply duplicate or
. master keys for foreign hotels, :

OPO REeT gs ware

Collect. meg ical information from cooperative contacts

on foreign leaders who have received medical treatment
or examinations in the US.

Obtain computer tape records of physicians practicing

in the US who have studied abroad. Although most were
foreign nationals, some were US. The taped information
included school, present’ business address, date of birth,
and specialty.

Acquire routing slips recording the fact of overseas
telephone calls between persons in the US and persons
overseas and telephone calls between two foreign points
routed through US switchboards, This activity lasted
for approximately six months but has ceased.

This information deleted because it reveals sensitive operational

techniques and methods.

co Sh ity

. . . Tye . .
' oo SAMES R, MURPHY . “Is ¥ , .
-e to Director’, Domestic Contact Service -

1 v8 . ‘ . .



--- Page 128 ---
so

', December 1967. (We no longer aC copy. a) 0074352

_ m SECRET
. 6 EYES ONLY @

7 May 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Central Intelligence

VIA : Deputy Director for Intelligence
FROM ; :, Director of Current Intelligence
SUBJECT : Activity Related to Domestic Events

1. In late spring of 1968 Walt Rostow, then
Special Assistant to the President for National Security
Affairs, tasked.the DCI with undertaking a survey of
worldwide student dissidence. Confronted-by timult at
campuses like Columbia and mindful of the violence
accompanying student outbuxsts at Berlin's Free University
and clsewhere, Rostow sought to learn whether youthful
Gissidence was interconnected: spawned by the same causes;
financed and hence manipulated by forces or influences
hostil‘ to the interests of the US and its allies; or likely
to come under inimical sway to the detriment of us interests.

; 2. The paper was prepared by [Paul Corscaddefl] of ocr
with the assistance the CA and .CI Staffs. ‘he DDI,
D/OCI, and Sorscadden net with Rostow to elicit. the reasons
for his er the President's concerns and to agree on the
sources to be examined, the research methods to be foll owed,
etc.

“3. Written during the summer of 1968, the most
Sensitive version of Restless Youth comprised two: sections.
fhe first was a philosophical Treatment of student unrest,
its. motivation, histor, and tactics. This section drew
heavily on overt literature and FBI reporting on Students
for a Democratic Society and affiliated groups. In a sense,
the survey of dissent energed from a shorter (30 page)
typescript study of] SDS and its foreign ties the same
author had done for Nr. Rostow at the DCI's irequest in

case mae ity 7 eS
ike ee eek

EYES ONLY

i
i
'
i
{
!
!
‘

tate Be



--- Page 129 ---
Co . SECRET
so o EYES ONLY 6

4, Because of the paucity of information on foreign
student movements, it was necessary to focus on SDS which
then monopolized the field of student action here and
abroad. A second section comprised 19 country chapters--

ranging from Argentina to yugoslavia--and stood by itself
as a review of foreign student dissidence.

5. Because SDS was a domestic organization, the
‘full paper Restless Youth, including the essay on world-
wide dissent went cnly to nine readers. A copy may be
_ in the Johnson Library. ; :

6. Following the paper's epev one le reception by’

. the President and Rostow, /the [she verorietea the NSC

4 » on student dissent. “The sensl fee rsion subsequently
was updated and sent to the White House in February 1969.

7. ‘The less sonsitive text was disseminated in
September 1968 and then updated and issued again in
March 1969 and August 1970,

Richard Lehman
Director of Current Intelligence

SECRET
EYES ONLY

« . , AQ
0042:


--- Page 130 ---
b ot ron

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

SUBJECT: Summary, Special Programs Division (SPD),
.. Office of Communications, Operational
Contacts with Other U.S. Government Agencies

which was then in Miami, had relatively frequent contact
with the Miami bureaus of the FBI and FCC, ‘Miami Police
and the Miami Beach Police. The staff provided support
to these activities in monitoring, identification and
DF of specific illegal agent transmissions conducted by
foreign nationals and American citizens in the greater
Miami area. _Arrangements*for this_support were made
through the(@DO's Chief, WH, Miami.)

In late September 1972, NSA, through Division(D/ ~

poo quested that the Special Programs Division initiate
a hearability survey of certain HF long-distance commercial

telephone circuits between the U.S. and South America.

The circuits carried drug related long-distance calls of
interest. to the BNDD and other U.S. agencies. Because of
the availability of personnel and technical capabilitics,
the survey was conducted at the OC Relay Station at tden 92.
Virginia, where the circuits could be satisfactorily inter-
cepted. On 15 January 1973, formal NSA tasking of the
intercept was instituted, On 30 January 1975, all coverage
was terminated by Division D because of possible legal
complications. .

3, The Chief and Deputy Chief, SPD and SPD/Special
Electronic Qperations Branch have been engaged in informal
technical liaison with operating components of the FBI
for a number of years. Initial contacts and arrangements
for support of specific activities have been made by the
Division()/DDO} Support has been provided in the form of

' DOWNGRADED TO SECRET.
_UPON REMOVAL OF ATTACHMENT

E2 IMPDET cL By{961947)
SECRET Aj
’

TALE ic wis OO?


--- Page 131 ---
8S. 03289/73

sealed envelope.

system was jointly conducted by NSA,( Division D/DD

b 7 a ry 1973

exchanges of technical information on techniques,. technical
assistance and training, and the loan of{ gencyJequipnens.
In the past several years, support has been rendered to
sensitive FBI projects. MGHAKK, UNION and WUGRAVEL. Support
has been and is presently being given to FBI projects ORKID
and ROSE. These projects are described in the attached

4. An. operational test of an NA: devenoped HYDE
and

OC-SPD personnel in the early part of the summer or 1972,

A location in Miami Beach, Florida was selected for the
tests because of similarity to the actual target site and
environment in Saigon. Receiving antennas were placed on
the roof of the hotel being used as the receiving/DF site.
A hotel employee asked why the materiel was placed on the
roof. A team member in effect told him that: the group

was an advance security segment for the Democratic National
Convention. No further questions were asked; the tests
were completed and the equipment was returned to the
Washington area.

* signed Iden 53

Chief, Special Prograns Division, oc

Att.

wu


--- Page 132 ---
Sih,

if} Wwe

MOHAWK—

UNION.

ORKID- -

SENSITIVE
° 9 My 1973

Electronic survey of ' Iden 63, ‘ fa
This operation was terminated apgroxXimately two ©
months ago. SPD/SEO personnel participated for
two days. ;

Fden 98 flooding of the cipher device employed by
the Iden 94. Embassy on their diplomatic communi- |
cation. link. SPD/SEO-support terminated two
years ago. . ‘ :

Electronic surveillance of Iden 64
Washington, D.C. SPD/SEO involved only in planning

‘at this time, (attendance at two meetings) .

-ROSE

Electronic surveillance of Iden 62

. SPD/CHT personnel sexrformed an”
electronic search of the Iden 62 _.. ared” and SPD/SEO
personnel conducted a spectrum search/recording

'. o£ the spectrum covering -to-.6 GHz during the

WOGRAVEL

ts fh: ante tF
{ Ch:
ake

t
B] A it Cok

period 16 to 20 April Me73,. Plans call for contin~
ued support by SPD in the future as requested.

Division D operation involving a Ider 95 code clerk.
SEO provided equipment, trained case officer in

use of device and stood by in Iden 97,

Washington, D.C., to back up case officer if needed.
The operation: took place in July 1972. -

We EET |
SENSITIVE _ 00142



--- Page 133 ---
. mp SECRET UMBRA .
- . r “BYES ONLY )
7 May 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Central Intelligence

VIA : Deputy Director for Intelligence
FROM : Director of Current Intelligence
SUBJECT : Activity Related to Domestic Events

1. in late 1967CoctIpaxticipatea in the preparation .
of several short intelligence memoranda dealing with the ;
foreign connections of US orcanizations and activists in-

yy volved in the anti-war movement. The main purpose of
C these reports, prepared at the reauest of the Wnite House,
was to determine whether any links existed between inter-
national Communist elements or forcaign governments and the
‘American peace movement. ‘he conclusion reached was that
there was some evidence of ad hoc contacts between. anti-
war activists at home and abroad but no evidence of
direction or formal coordination.

2. In October 1967 President Johnson expressed “*
a interest in this subject and ordered a high level: inter-
\ departmental survey. In response to his personal request
' “QB to the DCI, Nr. Helms asked the(CI Staff to collect. whats
-‘ever information was available through our own sources ‘and
through liaison with the FBI and to pass it to OCI, which
was directed. to prepare a memorandum from the DCI to the
President, ;

3. La book message requirement was sent to all stations
to report whatever information was on hand relevant to this
subject aj Although agent reports on Communist front opera-
tions overseas were of some value, the primary source of
information on the activities of US activists--and that was
ghite limited--was sensitive intercepts produced by NSA,
which had been similarly tasked by the White House.

AM, oe P SECRET UMB

. EYES ONLY

IPSS fen Certo
Gi  CEGIST GO


--- Page 134 ---
tee tf . . ‘ ° ~

of ae @ He SECRET UMBRA
i . oo EYES ONLY

(Ocranr. CI Staff\and forwarded to the(DCL2. He passed
this t;p2seript memo, dated 15 November 1967, to the
Presid nt personally. The White House copy is ‘now in
the fizus of President Johnson's papers at the library
in Austin. ; . .

5K .. 6.<°A Geuft,_ memorandum was jointly prepared by

‘
‘5° Beie£& follow-up memoranda were prepared and
_terwaiced tc the White House on Zi December and 17°
* Sanuew : 1962. According to our best recollection, no
furthe, “inished intelligonce reports on intexnational

connec!.ions,.of the peace movement were produced.

eee ha ob

- \-~,  ° Richard Lehman .
Director of Current Intelligence

36e SECRET UNBRA
O° BYES ONLY

' 0029-4



--- Page 135 ---
country that the file is. essential. (To my knowledge,

have no way to separate them; we have files on

7 May 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR: 0/DDI

SUBJECT: . ‘ Involvement In Domestic Affairs

‘1, This memorandum responds to the DDI's
request for a listing of any questionable
involvements in domestic affairs, I do not believe
that CRS is doing anything that a reasonable
man could construe as improper.

2. CRS does, of course, have several programs
to acquire still pictures, movies, videotares
and books either privately, sceretly or. without
acknowledgement that CIA is the actual end user.
CRS is regularly involved with Customs in looking
at the content of film cans addressed to the
Russian Embassy in Washington. Customs occasionally
also provides access to other film from denicd
areas. It may be uwddressed to private citizens
or organizations or other embassies. These efforts
are aimed at acquisition of positive foreign
information,

3. CRS files do not generally bear on U.S.
citizens or organizations. The biographic file-
building criteria specifically excludes U.S.
nationals unless the person has become of such
Major importance in the political lite of a foreign

only 2 persons so qualify. One is the wife of
the opposition leader of Guyvana-and the other.
is Hope Lang. Our Cuban files probably include
some persons who are now U.S. citizens but we

U.S. defectors to, Cuba.)

le

Seouel



--- Page 136 ---
/

SUBJECT: Involvement In Domestic Affairs

4. The CIA Library has several inforral
snag files intended to aid the librarians in
answering ‘the kinds of questions that they know
they will get on a continuin ng basis. An
appointnents file is a colle. tion of clippings
on appointed federal officials: who holds what
job when and what is his background? The extremist
files are a collection of folders ona variety
of organizations ane a few people with intricate’
Organizational links. Any sort of extremism
is grist for these particular files. Anda few
persons, ¢.g., Rap Brown and Eldridge Cleaver,
have dossiers consisting almost exclusively of
Clippings fron. -public mecia. These files are
unclassified and consist nostly of clippings

from the public press: U. Se, foreign, andergrouna,
scholarly.

5. I am not aware of any other kind of
involvement in domestic activities that is not
related to development of techniques or logistics
or legitimate training of CRS personnel.

poor ft

H.C. EISENBEISS)
AV 5) Director, Central Reference Service



--- Page 137 ---
™ : ty . | @ May 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR: DDI

SUBJECT 2 Sensitive Activities

FELL i X6)

1. FBIS has been engaged in no activities related to the ‘Ellsberg
and Watergate cases, * 7

2. FBIS operations occasionally extend to the domestic arena. From
time to time, FBIS linguists are made available to DDO or Office of
Conmunications componeats for special operations (usually abroad) involving
close~support.S{GINT work or translation of audio take. ‘On one occasion .
recently DDO, on behalf of the FBL, requested the services of several
FBIS linguists skilled in Arabic to work directly for tha FBI oa a short~
term project here in Washington. The arrangements were made by Mr. Oberg
of the DDO CI Staff. He said the project was very highly classified and
that FBIS participation was approved by Mr. Colby and the Director. FBIS
participation was. approved by the Director of FBIS after a check with
the ADDI. Other examples of sensitive linguistic support.work are help
“in the handling and resectlement of defectors, the recent assignment of
an employee to the. Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs to transcribe
recordings in a rare Chinese dialect, and the detailing cf another
Chinese linguist on two occasions to assist in the U.S. military training
of Chinese Nationalist cadets.

3. Within its responsibility for monitoring press agency trans—~
missions for intelligence information, FBIS publishes and distributes
some material which’falls in a "gray" area of copyright protection, libe?,
and privacy of international communications. Press services controlled
by national governments and transmitted by radioteletype without .
specific addressees, e.g. the Soviet TASS service and the PRC's NCNA,
are monitored by FARIS and the material is disseminated without restrie-
tion. The legality of this has been affirmed by decisions of the
Office of General Counsel. However, we also monitor some in-house,
correspondent—to-headquarters dispatches which are considered private
point-to-poiat transmissions. FBIS therefore avoids public distribution of
material monitored from these circuits by labeling them with an "Official
Use Only" caveat, The same caveat is used on material which we monitor
from other press agencies which are protected by international copyright,
e.g. Agence France Presse (AIP), the Middle East News Agency (MENA), and the
nN Iraqi Nes Agency (INA). This procedure has allowed FBIS to disseminate news

.

FE CO one

we Cf V ) . [-Bamcer cu nv03 .



--- Page 138 ---
ai

bee te oO
Vevaire

LW |

[ eney material for nearly three decades without problems. Recently,
however, the Office of General Counsel has ruled that an "Official Use
Only" caveat will not bar such material from the general public under
the Freedom of Information Law and we are accordingly Looking into
alternative measures, among which arc: (1) the purchase of news services
with rights to publish and disseminate; and (2) the classification of
those item$ vital to the government's business which we must continue

to monitor and report. An ultimate decision will be weighed against
the risk of present Procedures.

4, The routine ‘FBIS monitoring of foreign radio broadcasts often
involves statements or speeches made by U.S. citizens using those radio
facilities. Examples are statements made or allegedly made by Amarican
Pow's in Hanoi, by Jane Fonda in Hanoi and by Ramsey Clark in Vietnan.
‘At the request of FBI and the Department of Justice, and with the
approval of the CIA Office of General Counsel, we have on occasion sub-
|mitted transcripts of such broadcasts to the Department of Justice as
|part of that Department's consideration of a possible trial. In such
leases, we have been required to submit names of FBIS monitors involved,
|presumably because of the possibility they might be required as witnesses.
(In one casé in 1971, an FBIS staff employee was directed to ‘appear as
an expert witness in the court-martial of a Marine. enlisted-man charged
with aiding the enemy in a broadcast from Hanoi.) FBIS views all this
with misgivings. Monitoring of such broadcasts is incidental and we
/frue attribution of their news to FBIS, and.we should not be considered

policemen maintaining surveillance of traveling Americans.

5. FBIS is an overt organization, but one aspect of its operations
is under Department of Commerce cover. The Joint Publications Reasearch '
Service (JPRS) was established in 1957 to provide the means’ through which
| great volumes of material from unclassified foreign publications could

be translated by large numbers of independent contractors in the United
States on a piece rate basis. Contractors are not witting of their CIA
employment. This use of cover is an anomaly in FBIS and contains some
risk of embarrassment to the Ageacy and to Commerce if it becomes public
knowledge. The surfacing of JPRS was given study in 1969, but after
consideration of all the pros and cons it was decided at the Executive

Director-Comptroller level not to proceed at that time. FBIS is presently
taking a second look. . i

pe.
eves a KROcHE

Director
Foreign Broadcast Information Service

ONR0R



--- Page 139 ---
= 8 May 1973

y

MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Science & Technology

“

SUBJECT : : TSD Support to Other Agencies

1, Technical Services Division's chartgr (CSI 1-8) requires
that it provide technical assistance to both/CIA operations and
other activities as may be dir ected by the Deputy Director for

Operations.

2. Over the years the(chief non-CIA yecipients of this
support have been the Department of Defense, the Federal
Bureau of Investigation, Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous
Drugs, Immigration and Naturalization Service; Department
of State, United States Postal Service, Secret Service, Agency
for International Development, and the White House.

3. While varying widely among the different recipients, these
services have included training and materials, and in a few in-
stances participation in the fields of audio and visual surveillance,
secret writing and related communications, personal protection,

° disguise,
concealment devices, electronic beaconry, illicit narcotics detec-
tion, and counter~sabotage/terrorism.

4. In most instances requirements for this support are
received by TSD through higher echelons (Office of the Director
or Deputy Director for Operations). Unless the service involved
is a trivial or continuing one, the request is referred to the
Foreign Intelligence Staff Departmental Coordination Group for
coordination and approval at the appropriate Agency levels.
Approval within TSD by the Chief of Operations or Development
and Engineering and the Chief of TSD or his Deputy also is re-
quired.

5. The attachment lists the primaty services s provided to
the organizations named in Paragraph two.

‘2 IMPDET
CL BY 059098

SECRET =. O0RRS


--- Page 140 ---
)

This information deleted because it reveals sensitive operational

techniques and methods,

wwe, Provision of forged documentation to non-DDO requesters,

whether they b&StA)or other Agency requesters, always ‘requires
approval of non-TSD offices. Support to the military for instance
would be validated by FI Staff/Departmental Coordination Group

t Headquarters or by the(COS overseas having responsibility for
coordination of the operation. BNDD requests are coordinated
with DDO/NARCOG) Requests for documentation of Immigration
and Naturalization Service is coordinated via the Alien Affairs
Staff.

; _9. Authentication items are issued on a loan basis and must
be returned to TSD or accounted for. After any documentation has
been issued, TSD retains photographs and records of such support
until the documentation has been returned to TSD. If the material
is not returned after a reasonable time, the requester is reminded
of the outstanding documentation.

. “7 ae -- a a
Attachment 5 . ° Sidney Gottlieb
Distribution: | Chief
O&l-Addiressee,w/att Technical Services Division

00235

_ CEPRET os



--- Page 141 ---
os } | . ATTAC@ ENT

Department of Defense

are

Documents, disguise, concealment devices, secret writing,
flaps and seals; counterinsurgency and counter sabotage courses

. have been furnished to all intelligence elements of the Department
of Defense and certain elements.of the Special Forces, All requests
are coordinated with the FI Departmental Coordination Group at
Headquarters and with the(Chief of Stations)overseas. In turn
these elements furnished TSD with exemplars of foreign identities
documents, foreign cachets, foreign intelligence secret writing
systems, foreign intelligence concealment devices. (Selected Le
audio requirements have been furnished overseas for CI -type -
cases. } :

Federal: Bureau of Investigation

At the request of the FBI we cooperate with the Bureau }
in a few audio surveillance operations against sensitive foreign ,
targets in the United States. : _

| Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs

. ») Beacons, cameras, audio and telephone devices for
i Ny overseas operations, identity documents, car-trailing devices,
: KW . SRAC, flaps and seals and training of selected personnel

/\ responsible for use thereof has been furnished this Bureau.
_ All requirements are sent t ‘DDO /NARCOG) for coordination
7 with area divisions and for action by TSD if appropriate. -
Requests overseas are coordinated with th€-COSs)or his
designee before action by TSD is taken.

Immigration and Naturalization

(«er analyses of foreign passports and visas, guidance in
developing tamperproof alien registration cards, ‘special
fluorescent stamp inks have been furnished the Service) Requests

f
‘ vs are forwarded directly to TSD for coordination within TSD if
\ technical, with the FI Departmental Coordination Group if oper-
! . ee .

ational, .- id
, . . Poot

SECRET 0° os (00ak?



--- Page 142 ---
Department of State

Technical graphics guidance on developing a new United
States Passport, analyses of foreign passports, car-armoring
and personnel locators (beacons) for Ambassadors have been
supplied the State Department, In addition analyses and
exposure of black letter operations against the United States
abroad are made, All graphics requirements are forwarded
to TSD for further coordination within the Division, The
Department of State furnishes exemplars of foreign passports,
foreign visas andin iho past passports ona priority basis.

’ Postal Service

vy, The Office of Chief Postal Inspector has had selected

4 personnel attend basic surveillance photographic courses, has

4 been furnished foreign postal information and has been the {
recipient of letter bomb analyses, furnished special fluorescent

W ink, typewriter analyses. Requirements are coordinated with

(\" thesDDO and DDO/EA,) The Post Office has furnished TSD
with exemplars of letter bombs and mail insertion capabilities
for CA material destined for foreign countries, We also have
an arrangement with the Post Office to examine and reinsert Z|
a low volume of certain foreign mail arriving in the United States.

Secret Service

Gate passes, security passes, passes for Presidential
campaign, emblems for Presidential vehicles; a secure ID
ay photo system have been furnished this Service. Blanket approval
for graphics support has been granted to the Deputy Director for
Operations. In each case TSD requests approval from the'DDO.

U.S. Agency for International Development

We furnish instructors to a USAID-sponsored Technical
Investigation Course (Counter Terror) at Los Fresnos Border,
‘Patrol Academy, Los Fresnos, Texas. Instructors are under
Department of the Army cover and the funding of our participation
is under an approval of a Cl-Police Group project, Courses are
given Spring and Fall each year. Instruction is given at the

oar 00240


--- Page 143 ---
request of ct/ea) Trainees represent internal security or
@ national pofice from all countries participating in AID Police

assistance programs.

White House

‘Stationery, special memoranda, molds of the Great
Seal have been furnished the Social Secretary, The Deputy
Director for Operations is apprised of thése requirements,

Police Respresenting Washington, Arlineton, Fairfax and
Alexandria : ;

During the period 1968 -- 1969 a series of classes
reflecting basic and surveillance photography, basic-audio,
‘locks and picks, countersabotage and surreptitious entry
were given to selected members from the above mentioned
cities, Overall training was approved by thel Director of
Genteral Intelligence)and in turn validation was required for
each course from the Director of Security, -



--- Page 144 ---
8 May 1973

203 South Buildin

TO: [Cicer dasignation, room number, ond
building)

DATE ;
OFFICER'S | COMMENTS (Mumber €ach comment to show from whom

 ronwasoeo | INITIALS to whom, Oraw a lina across column ofter eacn comment}

Attached herewith are addition:i
explanations of TSD support to
other U.S. Government agencies,

: SE CUY
| SUBJECT: (Opticnal) ry 4 oo! ; |
FROM: * EXTENSION | NO,
Sidney Gottlieb . -
Chief, TSD - x-2831) oat |
i
i

nearer anes sates

~ Epes EUTA ey y

Beene Ta Lisa

09229

35.

a

a G10 nba" CT] SECRET OC) couriventls 1 gees OD vactassieiga



--- Page 145 ---
:

ATTACHMENT |

os FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION

TSD has had a close: working relationship with the FBI over
the past few years. The’ FBI is the only organization that has
been fully briefed on TSD audio techniques and equipment. The

(A)

(B)

(D)

following are situations where TSD equipment and guidance were
involved in operations:

Identity 59. ‘+ Four masked transmitters were
installed. Two have failed and two remain workable.

Identity 60 | ~ A TSD built masked transmitter

_ was.-installed to collect emanations from a crypto-
, graphic machine. The system continues to function

when samples of the emanations are needed.

Identity 61 - Two transmitters have been
installed and are operating. One is specifically
designed to'collect the sounds of typewriting, the
other is a straight audio transmitter to collect con-
versations. A FBI agent is manning the listening

‘post. A third system is not oper-

ating, probably due to battery expiration. The tape.
made from this room was made‘by the Nationa
Security Agency before failure. . ,

Identity 62 - TSD furnished equipment and con-
sultation covering Identity 62

First masked switched trans-
mitters were used in two apartments used as tempor-°

“ary quarters. Later masked switched transmitters

and microwave transmitters were installed in the
permanent quarters along with mic and wire installa-
tions, entirely furnished by the Bureau. This install-
ation is not fully operational because the full comple-
ment of personnel have not yet arrived.

ret — 00222 -
SECRET C0ean



--- Page 146 ---
(F)

(G)

— (EL me - This is an operation -

participation by National Security Agency. Itis
designed i in anticipation of the Identity 64

; in Washington. The listening post was
obtained by usinglthe Agency coverf.mechanisms
for procuring the property. New systems are
being designed and produced by using TSD's covert
contractor mechanisms and TSD engineers.

Identity 65 .  - Ten masked audio devices pur-~
chased from TSD were installed in Identity 65

by the FBI, Part of the equipment was install-
ed in November and December 1971, the remaining
equipment.was installed 17.- 25 March 1972. Tests
made by a TSD officer from a temporary. FBI

listening post on 8 - 9 November 1972, proved that

the target equipment no longer functioned and was

_ believed discovered by the occupants,

TSD has furnished equipment items which constitute
an on-thé-shelf capability to engage in photo and ;
audio surveillance operations which might not be
known to the Agency. In one case it is known that a
relatively unsophisticated device was used against

a domestic target.

CbR2



--- Page 147 ---
“te ‘
‘SECRET

~ so [ TSD/SDB_ Memo noon}

‘8 May 1973
oO
"MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, TSD
ATTENTION: Executive Officer
SUBJECT: Contacts with Domestic Police Organizations |
— . —

2. In December 1968, July 1969 and December 1970, SDB
provided basic countersabotage familiarization training for
selected members of the Washington metropolitan area police
departments. The training was given at the Fairfax County
police pistol and rifle range. Authorization for the train-
ing came from DDP and Chief, Office of Security.

_ 2, On occasion during the past few years, under the
auspices of the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration of
the Department of Justice and with the approval of CI Staff
and Office of Security, SDB provided training and familiari-
zation. to police officers of several domestic police
departments in the uses of the Explosives Residue Detection
Technique and Trace Hetals Detection Technique. These tech-
niques had been declassified and are currently available to

e law enforcement community. The National Bomb Data Center
publishes periodic guidance in their uses.

3. In order to augment the SDB mission responsibilities
in.the field of countersabotage and counterterror, SDB offi-
cers have in the past two years visited, under appropriate
covers, the explosives disposal units of the New York City
police department, Dade County (Miami) Florida Dept. and the.
Los Angeles Police Dept. Also, in March 1973,-two SDB offi-
cers attended the Explosives and Ordnance Disposal Conference
in Sacramento,. California, sponsored by LEAA. When the
recent letter bomb menace began in September 1972, our liaison
with the NYCPD bomb sauad paid off in that we had complete in~ |
formation on letter bomb construction in hours, enabling the: “
Agency to make worldwide dissemination within a day. :

/s/_ Identity 120 °
i
; Oranrcs - CfEsp/ops/s * ;
cS GRe] ON” 0922

BZVIMPUET/CL BY 06223).


--- Page 148 ---
ORD-2328-73
~ 9 MAY 1973

ian

MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Science and.
. Technology

; SUBJECT : : Repeated Survey of ORD for Non- \
4) e Foreign Intelligence Activities )

The 7 May survey has been repeated and refined ©
with respect to alllORD services\or dealings with
other agencies on domestic, non-forcign matters... In

7) addition, this report covers all our activitics deal-
NY) ing with the research and development of intelligence
a equipment for foreign use which has been tested in
ow the United States and might have collected domestic
information. Again, each member off-ORDSavailabic
today was asked cither directly or through his super-
visor to provide the above requested information,
whether he was directly involved or not. We have
used all diligence to search our records available
to us during this time period to ensure this is a
complete and factual list.

ae Nite
Lee

Director of Research & Development

Attachments:
.1 - Contacts with Other
Governmént Agencies’
2 - Domestic Tests

C0028


--- Page 149 ---
f— — , : . .
. .

6

we, : , a».
WK CONTACTS WITH @:: U.S. GOVERNMENT aceMbes WHICH
ANO COULD OR HAVE RESULTED IN USE OF CIA-DEVELOPED !

* TECHNOLUGY IN ADDRESSING DOMESTIC PROBLEMS
Executive Office of the President
AA b ( ORD represents DD/S&T on the R&D Sub-Committee
4 of the Cabinet Committee for International Narcotics

Control that is concerned with research support of
the narcotics control problem. _)

(Dr. Leonard Laster, OST) (Cianci/LS)
Office of Telecommunications Policy ‘

Technical surveillance countermeasures and
physical security information was exchanged with
them.

a

(Noe/TA)
Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs (BNDD) ‘

" Techniques and equipment for navigation and
tracking was discussed with BNDD.

(Mr. Charles Gaskin, BNDD) (Van Dewerker/TA)
¥ . ; . (Noe/TA)-

Technical information was exchanged relating.
to the development of simple, portable sensor systems
for the detection of concealed bulk narcotics and
narcotic laboratory effluents.

"(Mr John Gunn and; ‘— (Parker/DSP)
’ Mr. Bill Butler, BNDD) . ..

Audio tapes were processed to improve their
intelligibility. The source of the tapes was unknown.

(Mr. Charles Gaskin, BNDD) (Scott/An)
_. “| .
il gaze
> SEGRET ATTACHMENT 1

. . . : ;
! ah

a ee ee


--- Page 150 ---
SECRET

. SUBJECT: Con@ts With Other U.S. Gov rent Agencies
Which Could or Have Resulted In Use of. CIA-

. Developed Technolagy in Addressing Domestic

_ Problems

\

BNDD (cont'd)

to receive proposals from Aerospace, Inc., concerning
a Radar People Detector developed for. ORD.}

iO tr BNDD was given'permission in the fali of 1972

(Mr. Charles Gaskin, BNDD) ° Identity 125 /LS)

: A prototype bioluminescence sensor was developed
for the detection of narcotics for application in
Southeast Asia. BNDD was given a demonstration of
the instrument. . . .

(Dr. Laster/OST) . .. (Terek/LS)
(Mr. Stan Sobel, BNDD) oe

USIB Technical Surveillance Countermeasures Comnittee

Continuing contacts ‘were maintained with the
intelligence community regarding technical surveillance
countermeasurs and physical security. This exchange
of information, reports, and cquipment has been con-
ducted under the auspices of USIB TSCC and involves
State, FBI, Secret Service, NSA, DIA, Army, AF, and
Navy. : ; oo .

Dia “(Noe/TA)
(Noyes/PD) °
* State Department

‘Two contracts for development. of countermeasures
techniques were funded jointly with the State Department.

(Noe/TA)



--- Page 151 ---
~

* SUBJECT: Contacts With Other U.S. Government Agencies
: Which Could or Have Resulted In Use of CIA-

Developed Technology. in Addressing Domestic
. Problems

Atomic Energy Commission’ (AEC)

Some’ of the AEC Laboratories, e.g., Savannah
River Laboratory, are supported by CIA to develop
radio nuclide sampling and detection techniques and
devices. These Laboratories have used sampling .
techniques developed for CIA to measure CONUS nuckear//
“plant releases, .

(Mr. B. Benson, AEC)  (Walker/DSP)

At the request of AEC Security Officer, Mr. Richard
Cowan, the walls of the. office of the Chairman of the
AEC (then Mr. Schlesinger) were X-rayed. The operation
occurred one evening and was an attempt to resolve some
anomalies created by the use of the non-linear junction
detector. ; ;

(Mr. Richard Cowan, AEC) " (Noyes/PD)

Law Enforcement Assistance Agency (LEAA) =

Reports and information about the ORD- developed
Adhesive Restraint, Non-Lethal Incapacitation System
were made available. to Department of Justice, LEAA in |’
‘| August 1972. If they developed the systen, it would |.
be used for civilian crowd and riot control. uy

Mr. Les Schubin, LEAA) Identity 125 718)

* Technical surveillance countermeasures’ and physical |
security infcrmation were exchanged with LEAA.

(Noe/TA)

‘



--- Page 152 ---
Contacts With Other U.S. Government Agencies
Which Could or Have Resulted In Use off CIA-’

Developed} Technotogy in Addressing Domestic

. Problems .

SUBJECT:

Treasury
an Dr. Leahy is being detailed to Treasury Department
'" to a@8sist in formulating their R&D program and organization
AX in anticipation of the establishment of the new drug
‘) ») _ enforcenent administration, The request for his services’
\ _ Was made by Identity 3, _ the Agency's Narcotics Coordi-
UU nator. Identity 3 discussed the request and cleared the

detailing through Mr. Colby.
(Leahy/LS)

Cus tons /Treasury Department

Technical discussions were held with Customs relating
to detecting illicit nighttime aircraft intrusions over
the U.S.-Mexico border.

(Mr. Martin Pera, Customs) tusveronce/0sP)

Alcohol § Tobacco Tax Div/TRS

be Cavout five years ago, assistance was requested in

¥ domestic search of “moonshine” stills using CIA infrared
scanners. This was turned down. 7

(Lawrence/DSP)

' . . .. Sectet Service

We have had numerous discussions with the Secret
Service regarding navigation and tracking techniques
and equipment. |

‘tl
(Van Dewerker/TA)



--- Page 153 ---
SUBJECT: cons With Other U.S. covMnont Agencies
: Which-Could or Have Resulted In Use of CIA-
Developed Technology in Addressing Domestic

- ‘Probiems -

Federal Aviation Agency (FAA)

The results of our research work in the detection
of métals (NOLIR) were.reported to FAA for possible use
in the detection of hijacker weapons.

(MacAnlis/RP)

“National Institute of Health (NIH)

At the request ofL ORD) OCS assigned a staff technician
to undertake to write a computer program for the Wisswesser
Line Notation (WLN) chemical notation method. This work was

done in cooperation. with. NIH.

(Ms. Coniver,. NIH) . Identity 125 /LS)

Arms Control and Disarmament Agency {ACNA) °

$/ORDJnot frequently with ACDA personnel in order
to s ructure (QRD' s) ‘BW/CW research programs to Support
ACDA needs.

‘Identity 125 /LS)

_ Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)

Technical information relating to detection of
radio nuclides in the environment was exchanged with

them.

(Mr. Charles Weaver, EPA) © ; - _ (Walker/DSP)

00233



--- Page 154 ---
. “4
fae Nae SO

SUBJECT: contiees With Other U.S. cove Ment Agencies
Which Could or Have Resulted In Use of (CIA-
Developed|Technology in Addressing Domestic
Problems~ . . 7

EPA (cont'd)

' Technical discussions relating to using IR scanning
equipment to detect underground fires in a sanitary land
£ill have been conducted... ;

(Mr. Gene James, EPA) (Risinger/DSP)

Federal Bureau of Investigation

At their request, we described Imagery Enhancement
techniques germane to removing distortions from some
photography they had on an alleged bank robber. Request
for specific support. in processing the imagery was turned

down.
' (Stephan/IPA)
Secret Service ;
Fl t—st ~
“UTS. Customs so
vw ; Mr. C.V. Noyes’ total contact with other agencies

in terms of assistance with domestic operations has be2n
in the field of audio survcillance countermeasures, anti-
hijacking, or drugs.

(Mr. Robert Burnell, SS) (Noyes /PD)
(Mr. Thomas Allen, FBI)
(Mr. Martin Pera, Customs)

“*-NASA and USDA (Agency association is classified SECRET)
We have an on-going program, Project TAMPER, to

‘develop automated systems for exploiting satellite-borne
multispectral sensors for earth resources assessments.

(Mri William Ruble, USDA) , _ (Galinaitis/IPA)
(Mr. Leonard: Jaffe, NASA) 1
(General Smart) . 7 .

6 0023.4



--- Page 155 ---
“ SUBJECT: Contacts With Other U.S. Government Agencies
Which Could or Have Resulted In Use of CIA-
. Developed Technology in Addressing Domestic

Problems . . .

Proposed. Use of NASA ERTS Satellite (Agency association
would be SECRET)

po. Che Agency is preparing a proposal for an experi-
A “mental program to aid in estimating the Soviet wheat
crop, A part of the information would be obtained from

© a satellite launched for other announced programs. Ground-
truth data will be collected on North American crops. 7).

(Briglia/PAS)

U.S. Department of Agriculture and Bureau of Narcotics
and Dangerous Drugs

CIA has requested the establishment of a two-acre |

<plot of opium poppies at a USDA research site in Washington
~ state, to be used for tests of photo-recognition of opium

N

v poppies.
(Mr. Quentin Jones, USDA) (Lawrence /DSP}
(Mr. Fred Garfield, BNDD) ; (Cianci/LS)

f Provost marsnail General

Army, Military Police Agency, Ft. Gordon
Air Force, Orfice of the Inspector General
Army, Ort

We have exchanged technical surveillance counter-
measures and physical security information with them.

(Noe/TA)

pes Arey S. Arm . .
ory Rocky Hountain Arsenal, Newport Army Anmuaition Plant,

Yoecile Ordnance Depot
4s LS/ORD tested environmental samples from testing,
storage and Production facilities in the U. S.

| Identity 12/LS)

7 . - ‘ 00235



--- Page 156 ---
- made available for USCG
.for night search of life boats

. SUBJECT: con Mes With Other U.S. cove nent Agencies
Which Could or Have Resulted In Use of CIA-
Developed Technology in Addressing Domestic
. Problems 7

U.S. Arny, Edgewood Arsenal a: ,

(_us/orp)is sharing expenses with EA in field testing
an IR remote detector of CW aerosols.”

Identity 125 /1,S)

U.S. Navy

ssp/orp eurnea over “about eight trained dolphins
to the Navy in December 1969, because we discontinued
our dolphin progran.

~ (ynch/Ls)

U.S. Coast Guard

About six years ago [crs infrared. equipment was.
oats. 4 evaluate IR as a means -.

(then- Lt. James McIntosh, USCG) (Lawrence/DSP)

Identity 174 Sheriff's Office
Corp conducted polygraph tests on all applicants.
- Polygraph security findings were compared with the
Sheriff’ s own security findings.
(Sheriff) . ; , . Identity 125 /LS)

A study was made on con-men ‘techniques and assess-
ment methods in 1967- 68.

- . (Sheriff) a ; tdentity 125/LS)



--- Page 157 ---
!
i
!
1

SUBJECT: Contacts With Other U.S. Government Agencies
Which Could or Have Resulted In Use of CIA-
Developed Technology in Addressing Domestic.
Problems

’ Chief, San Francisco Police

. For security: reasons, the Chief was made aware of
a study to evaluate attempts by non-Chiense to penetrate
Chinese social groups. (1967)

(Police Chief) oo - . Identity 125/LS)

a = ; ‘ . .
SnecE] 4 (00Ra7



--- Page 158 ---
wv

Be

- DOMESTIC TESTS FOR . .
AGENCY RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT EFFORTS

: 1.'.As a normal part of ORD's efforts in the
research and development of equipment and techniques
for Agency applications in foreign intelligence, we
conduct experiments and ‘tests in the United States.
Clearly,.the design and development of our intelli-

- gence equipments can be done more economically and

more securely in this country. Although most of
the tests of our R&D equipments are performed in
Closed laboratories or in secure arcas simulating
the foreign environment, some of the tests and experi-_
ments, of necessity, reveal domestic information.

... # <A review of the surveillance equipment or
techniques which have at some time or other: been
exposed to domestic testing is as follows:

a. Laser Probe - About 1967, the laser
probe developed by ORD was tested by TSD in
San Francisco under very closely controlled
conditions. The ORD Project Officer witnessed
portions of the test. Recordings that were
made of laser probe output were carefully
pcontrolled as classified material and it is

“believed that the tapes have long since been
' destroyed. (Wood/TA) :

‘bs Microwave Intercept System - About
1968, this system was *tes:ced in a light air-
craft near the Naval Ordnance Test Station.
in Identity 127:, California. This system is
designed to permit intercept of microwave
telephone communication channels of systems
Such as Identity 130 ooo » ‘It
works equally well against the Bell Telephone
TD-2, as they are generically the same. Re-
cordings of these telephone intercepts were

carefully controlled and were destroyed severa
years ago.

Vile

" oranet ATTACHMENT 2.

09238



--- Page 159 ---
.

SUBJECT: ron Mec Tests for Agency reMrch and
-~ Development Efforts 7 :

' -¢. Telephone Intrusion Study - The objec-
tive of this current program is to develop a
means-to utilize foreign telephone systems as
a communication link without the knowledge of
the host system. In order to carry out this
objective, it is necessary to learn the com-
plete supervisory signalling and sequencing
control system hierarchy for the various foreign ‘
telephone systems. Many of these are patterned !
after the U.S. system and, for this reason,
limited monitoring to test the operation of
intercept equipment’ in the United States is
planned. The data to be coliccted would be ; F
merely the signal tones from which supervisory I
codes can be extracted. Message content is s
of no interest and will not be recorded. Over-
seas testing is planned at a subsequent date.

To date, some domestic testing of this concept a
has been carried out at the contractor's plant. »
No recordings have been made of such data. Ex- 2
tremely brief tests exercising U.S. and forcign
telephone systems through supervisory tone sig-
nalling have been carried out to verify initial
concepts. The duration of testing was less
than one-half hour.

d.- Other Sensor Testing - Examples of

’ engineering development tests of special sensors
within the United States include infrared and
high-altitude photography, forward-looking IR iH
(FLIR) flights, laser scannors, industrial efflu- |
ent sampling for isotopes, and airborne magne-
tometer surveys for metal (rifles and trucks). \
In al] these cases, the data output of such
testing has been used for engineering develop- -
ment and the content has been restricted to
disseminaticn to those in Government involved
with the engineering design.



--- Page 160 ---
x

. SUBJECT: Domegkic Tests for Agency Resdirch and
Devcd@pment Efforts

_

e. Remote Physiological Measurements -
An ORD-developéd cryogenic magnetometer iS
being tested at a contractor's site for use
as a remote cardiograph (magnetocardiograph).
Some test subjects are witting, but most tests
are on naive subjects (they de not know they
are being tested). The magnetometer is com-
pletely harmless to the subject and the test
results are closely held. ©

£. Personality Structure of Defectors
Study - ORD undertook to determine the per-
sonality structure of defectors during the
period 1966-69. The work primarily involved
an analysis of the open literature on known
defectors. An ancillary effort was concerned
with. a study of the phenomenon of defection
itself, i.e., leaving one religion for another,
or changing one set of political beliefs for
another. The work was conducted at Stanford
University. Identity 125/Ls)

g. Trained Rirds - Birds have been trained
and tested in the United States to carry small
intelligence collecting packages such as audio
surveillance devices, small cameras, and cur-
rent measuring devices. Any data collected
from unwitting domestic sources would have been

. used only for engineering purposes and then
destroyed, .

h. Communications Link Loading Study - In.
the period from IS70 through 1972 various means’
were used. to check out an intercept system designed |
to operate against Iden 93 communications links. .
Under carefully controlled conditions, some U. S.
microwave communications were recorded and passed
through the intercept system under test to prove
quality of performance. All intercept material
connected with this was destroyed within a few weeks
of the time of intercept and the material was never
checked for substantive content. NSA participated
and controlled most elements of the U. S. material3:~


--- Page 161 ---
-7 May 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Science and
ae Technology

SUBJECT ; : Survey of ORD for Non-Foreign
Intelligence Activities

At 11 a.m. today, each division and staff chief
or his representative was instructed to query all of
his people and report back by this afternoon whether
or not they had provided any services or dealt with
any other agencies on domestic, non-foreign matters.
‘The. attached list is an inventory of all items we

were able to uncover. If additional information on

any of these topics is desired, we can provide either

.@ verbal or a written report on very short notice,

oh = ake bec lo E EM Boren

Scientific Advisor
" Attachment:

As stated

Director of Research & Development

Cesles: Wigan ate, hasest cas



--- Page 162 ---
vet TAMPER, an on- going program which may be
politically sensitive. ] .

A proposed OER wheat estimate program which may be
poiitically sensitive.

(largoties om foreign activities are well. known
6° n DDS@T.

A negative report from the Support Staff.

[oes NOLIR work was ‘reported to the FAA about “7
i three years ago. No action was taken, to our knowledgeae

i
{ye . Robert Scott - Performed intelligibility enhancement VY
, of audio tapes for BNDD. Source of tapes unknown.

James M. Stephan - At the request of FBI, we described
Imagery Enhancement Techniques germane to removing
distorticns from'some photography they had on an
alleged bank ‘robber... Request for specific support

in processing the imagery was turned down. ©

>



--- Page 163 ---
5 , say vy

C. V. NOYES

. My total contact with other agencies in terns of assistance
with domestic operations has’ been in the field of audio sur-
veillance countermeasures, anti-hijacking, or drugs. Speci-
fically, I participated in TSCC and RED Subcommittee meetings

“which included technology. exchanges and some equipment ex-

changes on a temporary- basis ostensibly for testing or trial.

“3 also assisted in x-raying the office walls of the Chairman

of the AEC (then Mr. Schlesinger) at the request of Mr. Richard |
Cowan of AEC Security. The operation occurred one evening
(date unknown) and was an attempt to resolve some “anomalies
created by the use of the nonlinear junction detector.
Other persons contacted over the years have been:
Mr. Robert Burnett, Secret Service |
_ Mr. Martin Pera, U. S. Customs
Mr. Marvin Beasley, DASA
Mr. Thomas Allen, FBI
Major Jack Nelson, OSI/USAF
Major John _Langager, ONI/USN

Mr. Richard Cowan, AEC — ‘ /



--- Page 164 ---
ee vo Thomas P. Noe
. 5/7/73

2. Continuing contacts with intelligence community.

' xegarding technical surveillance countermeasures and |

physical security. (This is an exchange of information and
reports and has been conducted under the auspices of the

USIB Technical Surveillance Countermeasures s Community.)

State _ * Navy

Air Force i. - US Secret Service
Army - NSA

DIA a "
FBI

2. _ Joint funding of two contracts with State Depart-
ment (PRN/LLL) . Two electret microphones were furnished
to State Department for test purposes. Joint funding of ©
one contract with NSA (Sandia). Participation in DNA/DOD
contract (Bureau of Standards).

' 3. Other DoD and Governnent contacts for information

collection or ‘exchange only. \
ARPA -
LEAA/Dept. of Justice
_DNA/DOD
Office Telecommun: cations Policy
Office of Army/Provost ‘Marshal General
Army/Military Police Agency, Ft. Gordon

Aix Force/0ffice of the Inspector General

Air Force/Electronic Systems Division

rprey - 00243
Mesh . : : :



--- Page 165 ---
\
_ : ~ 7 May 1973

LS/ORD CONTACTS WITH DOMESTIC COUNCIL AGENCTES

APE _ 1, BND2(Charles Gaskin) was given permission to recéive sa]

proposals from Identity 135, concerning a Radar People Detector
developed for ORD. Time: Fall of 1972. Action was approved by
D/ORD. .

2. BSD/ORD turned about eight trainea dolphins over to the
Navy. Time: December 1969

a

= 3. Develoved Adhesive Restraint, Non-lethal Incapacitation ‘System.
Reports and information was made available to Department of Justice, LEAA
in August 1972. If they develoved the system, it would be used for
civilian crowd and riot control.

Onnee
at Und ‘


--- Page 166 ---
mae tou

~ a , WEE

@ — - e 29 MAY 1873 |

MEMORANDUM FOR: Executive Secretary CIA ‘Management
, Committee

SUBJECT : Reported .Identity 61 _ Burglary

1, Attached is a report summarizing what we know about the
reported break-in of Identity 61. An investigative report
by an officer of the Executive Protective Service states that the
offices were ransacked and a number of personal items stolen.

2. The attached summary also describes a separate audio |
operation conducted against Identity 61 . by the FBI, at the
ay UBseney'g s 's] behest and with its technical support. This presents a
elated”question that should be noted. James McCord's' testimony
indicates that he placed telephone. calls to the. Identity 75 and Identity
61. : He says he picked the numbers at random, hoping
that if his phone was tapped his attorneys would be able to challenge
the evidence as being tainted. Another witness, John Caulfield,
says McCord called the two named Iden 75 and Iden 61 because he "was sure!
they ''were subjects of national security wiretaps." :

. Ak 3. In fact, there has been a long-standing telephone tap on the
. av Identity 75 , run by the FBI, about which{ CI Staf{pelieves McCord
\ knew. It is possible that he also had an inkling of some sort of operation

agéinst Identity 61 *, and assumed that it was also a telephone
tap. One must speculate that he played for double insurance, hoping
that both his telephones and those of the Iden 75 and Iden 61 were tapped, and
that one way or another his case would be dismissed or dropped
because of tainted evidence or to avoid revealing the sensitive
operations. At this point, given the publicity of the Iden 61 break-in,
and the testimony of McCord and Caulfield, the current investigations

may lead to exposure of the operations.
Af: / y4
EM xp U4 ve

Fue V. Broe

Inspector General

entree
Attachment: .
As Stated Above

ANS Then
wrt . wt

eee OP,

oveud Cale of event
ne



--- Page 167 ---
. 24 May 1973
MEMORANDUM FOR: Inspector General

SUBJECT _ + Reported Burglary of the Identity 61 -

; 1. The press reported a burglary of Identity 61 , 13-14
May 1973. An investigative report by an officer of the Executive
Protective Service states that the offices were ransacked and a
number of personal items were stolen. There were some latent
fingerprints, but no identification was made. The FBI, which states
that the incident was on 15 May, did not investigate because it deter-
mined that it did not have jurisdiction. The Identity 61
registered a formal complaint and American regrets were expressed,
Identity 61 making it clear that they suspected something other than
ordinary robbery. We have no additional information on the subject.
There had been an carlier intelligence operation against the Identity 61
which is described below,

- 0 2. On 16 April 197 ne Agency roposed to the FBI the instal-
fon of technical covera ‘ity 61 The opportunity

s)

ne

for such an installation came Pabout when a domestic asset of Foreign
Resources Division reported that he had been asked to submit a bid

for a contract to renovate Identity 61 Upon securing the
contract the asset was willing to augment his work force as appropriate
or install material which would be provided him, (The Agency propo: sed
to turn this asset over to the FBI and to provide technical and logistic
support. ' The value of such an operation to the intelligence community
was cited. :

3. On 23 April 1971 FBI Director John Edgar Hoover turned
down the Agency proposal. That same day CIA Director Richard Helms
sent a letter to Attorney-General John Mitchell requesting that the FBI
turndown be reversed, citing the importance of the Iden 61 target and
national intelligence needs to collect positive intelligence... On 24 April
the Attorney-General reversed the FBI decision and the Washington ;
Field Office of the Bureau was instructed to proceed with the operation.

_ 00882 .



--- Page 168 ---
Wi

4. During the period from 26 April to 18 May all the
technical equipment from the Agency .to the F BI was delivered,
installed and tested. Everything seemed to be working, No Agency.
personnel were involved: in any way with actual installation of
equipment in Identity 61 From May to February Agency tech-
nicians helped calibrate, reset and do other repair work on occasions

of equipment failure in the FBI listening post, On no occasion did

they enter Identity 61,

5. The Agency requested that coverage of Identity 61 - be
stopped on 3 February 1972 after FBI Director J, Edgar Hoover
advised that he was scheduled shortly to testify in Congress and
might have to advise them that the installation in Identity 61°
was initiated atc Jrequest. The operation and equipment, to the
best of the Agenty's knowledge, was dormant until 8 December 1972
when the FBI was asked by the Agency to reactivate coverage, The
request at this time was occasioned by the knowledge that a Iden 76
delegation would be arriving in Washington for discussions on
nationalization of foreign holdings, While the FBI was still
in the process of reactivating the equipment, the Department of
State on 20 December 1972 requested the FBI to institute all possible. |
coverage of Identity 61 - and on 22 December 1972 coverage
was partially reinstitutéd with full coverage in effect by: 26 December
1972,

6. A review of the take from the operation, weighed against |
the risks involved, led the Agency to conclude that the activity was
not worth continuing. On 16 February 197% CIA) requested the FBI
to discontinue the coverage. On 22 February 1973 the FBI advised
that microphone surveillance of Iden 61 was discontinued.

10 Reeharde,

‘¢/ John C. Richards

, 0036:

Gresey Gyan



--- Page 169 ---
IS non
a o” " Pe an
De sow _ _

ferred to in JCRichards' 24 v 73 memo to ‘IG ,
paragravh 2, re Identity 61™ Break-in
1. The “Foreign Resdurees Division asset /was Identity 77

Ls aa Addendum ©
oe .

Isr 9 . who owned the Identity 78
_« The Agency had initially agreed
to reimburse Iden 77 for losses suffered up to $2500, The final

amount of remuneration turned: out to be $4,828.53. Another FR

asset who worked on this operation was Identity 79 plumber and

elettrician of McLean, Va. He was terminated by FR in January 1972,

2, TSD personnel who entered and worked in the FBI listening j
post were: ‘Identity 80, Identity 30 and Identity 45

Go 268 :

of TSD and Harold Leith of Div



--- Page 170 ---
Coordination
A. Internal . 7 ,

In developing its cadre of general. support assets
and access agents, the FR Division maintains close contact
with the{ Donestic Contact Servicelot the Directorate for
Intelligence, using their assets wherever and whenever
possible to support FR's ‘operational activities. To a
more ‘limited degree, FR Basés maintain contacts with Office
of Security and Office of Personnel field representdtives,
pursuing the occasional leads surfaced by’ these officers
and using their entre to specific individuals who can
provide access to targets of operational interest.

B. External

FR officers in the field maintain coordination with:
their FBI counterparts. There is limited cooperation
with Bureau offices on internal security cases involving

Soviet and Bloc officials and the local FBI offices are

of. occasional help in operations involving other nationals.
The local field offices of the FBI are. made aware of the
presence of FR officers in their jurisdictions and have on.
occasion provided backs topping on cases. where there was.
some flap potential.
Coordination with the FBI of FR Division's agent
recruitment activity is governed by an agreement between
, the Agency and the FBI dated 7 February 1966.
The Bases also have contact with local Immigration
| and Naturalization Service offices although. these contacts
, are less frequent and less important than the contacts

with “the FBI offices.

SECRET


