
--- Page 1 ---
124-10271-10304| | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |

. +t OPTIONAL FORM HO. 19 4010-106
. BAY 1982 LOTION
YOSA GEN, FIG, O27

‘ UNITED STATES CQ eewmenr . é
SECRED
Memorandum

TO : Mr. D. Jd. Brennan, or _ DATE: February 13, 1970

FROM I 8. d. Papich
é > . , ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED

ipumecr: ; HEREIN [S UNCLASSIFIED EXCEPT
en ON EO cio WAHERE SHOW OTHERWISE.

- CIA, furhished thé following to the’
. Liaison Agent on 2/10/70. 6)

ve

YA has established a U.S. based notional organization
representing itself as beirig communist:oriented and having the
following mailing addresses: P.O. Box 444, Boston, Massachusetts,
02102 and P.O. Box 8272, General Post Office, Philadelphia,

Pennsylvania, 19101, The organization's activity in the U.S.
will be restricted to production of propaganda in. the form of
pamphlets, etc., which material will be mailed to various Left
Wing groups in foreign countries. The primary objective of.
this operation is to develop penetrations and/or sources in
revolutionary Arab erouns in the MA. ddle East. The organization
is completely notional in cuaracter in thal there Fill be ao
offices in the U.S. (only p.o, boxes) and even the officials
Will bear fictitious names, CIA hopes that once the propaganda
begins circulating, Arab groups will become interested and will
’ endeavor to establish contact with “officials" of the organization
If this develops, CIA will then proceed to use its own personnel
under "suitable" cover to make the contact. Fram thea on CIA
WLIL maneuver to penetrate the target group. ((S

.

. [a response to the Liaison Agent's request, CIA will
furnish samples of propaganda, The Agent also asked that we
be given copies of communications sent to the mailing addresses
by any organizations or individuals. We should have such data
so that we can take the necessary investigative action in the
; event any persons or organizations in the U.S. take an interest

20), A

YY ! in the captioned group. We, of course, Will also be interested
> FS ; in international ramifications which could have a bearing on.;
§0o “38: the activities of Left Wing activity in this county, |The Agent
4 ae also asked for the names of the gfficials which will be: related .
8 BO to the Union for Revolution, nop
KO
“Ba (ss this stage there do. not appear to be any conditions
ak or developments which would have an adverse pearing on our

operations or jurisdiction providing that CIA keeps us adequately

informed. CIA asks that it be apprised of any information coming

_ to our attention concerning the crganization., CIA further requests

that its interest not be revealed outside of the mG and that

' this information be handled on a need-to-know vessel) ia
Ey

SdPiwnk ly (16 >
Oy es G6 % Segre Mle ui” OVER
sf Cat

Sowtion lndefinis ‘ENCLOSURE



--- Page 2 ---
‘Memorandum to Mr, D, J: Brennan, Jr.
RE: UNION FOR REVOLUTION

ACTION:

(The above information is being directed to the
attention of the Internal Security Section and the
Nationalities Intelligence Section. 3aison will follow .
in order to obtain samples of the propaganda referred to
above and will again reiterate that we be furnished copie
of communications transmitted to the mailing addresses. YS )

.

seteme

Bnet



--- Page 3 ---
© OPTIONAL FORM NO. 19 $0016
wy BAY 1942 TOITION .

: GS GUN, REG, “su. 27 . rN : -
aa URITED STATES OG sxr0enr : r

. Memorandum
TO : Mr. D. J. Brennan, Jr _ DATE: February 13, 1970
FROM F S. Jd. Papich
/. ~ Be . ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED
; : HEREIN IS UiEGLEASS FED ERCE EPT
ipusecr: UNION FOR-REVOLUTION yey (s 8) WHERE SHOW QTHERWISE

“ne Giorman Garrett, CIA, furhished thé following to the
aison APent on 2/10/70
On SFE GYCR)

{ous has established a U.S, based ‘notional organization
representing itself as being communist oriented and having the
following mailing addresses: P.O. Box 444, Boston, Massachusetts,
02102 and P.O. Box 8272, General Post Office, Philadelphia,
‘Pennsylvania, 19101. The organization's activity in. the U.S.

will be restricted to production of propaganda in the form of
pamphlets, etc., which material will be mailed to various Left
Wing groups in foreign countries. The primary objective of

this operation is to develop penetrations and/or sources in
ravolutidonary Arab grouns in the Middle East. The organization

is compLetely notional in Gharatiers tu that therve Will be no
offices in the U.S. (only p.o, boxes) and even the officials

Will bear fictitious names. CIA hopes that once the propaganda

‘| begins circulating, Arab groups will become interested and will
‘}endeavor to establish contact with “officials" of the organizations
If this develops, CIA will then proceed to use its own personnel |
under "suitable" cover to make the contact. From thea on CIA
WiLL maneuver to penetrate the target sroup.\6)

} ; Cn response to the Liaison Agent's request, CIA. will
furnish us samples of prcepaganda. ‘The Agent also asked that we

Saks
A,

a be given copies of communications sent to the mailing addresses
iS ZR by any organizations or individuals. We should have such data
Yaa Co so that we can take the necessary investigative action in the
Ryat3 event any persons or organizations in the U.S. take an interest

| SLi Ge in the captioned group, We, of course, will also be interested

LES in international ramifications which could have a bearing on... _-

H Ars the activities of Left Wing activity in this county y | The Agent
Aig also asked for the names of the officials which” wilT be’ related

to the Union for Revolutions \O)

Cat this stage there do.s not appear to be any conditions
or developments which would have an adverse bearing on our.
operations or jurisdiction. providing that CIA keeps us adequately
informed, CIA asks that it be apprised of any information coming
to our attention concerning the organization. CIA further requests
that its interest not be revealed outside of the Bureau and that
this information be handled on a need-to-know basis °

JPswmk  ClassifiedSay
. By ‘ Exempt frgGNGD
Date of Déclassilt

passant CONTINUED = OVER
ation Inc Indefinite



--- Page 4 ---
TER ae @ ; an”
‘Memorandum to Mr. D. J. Brennan, Jr.
RE: UNION FOR REVOLUTION

ACTION:

; (one above information is being directed to the
attention of the Internal Security Sectioiw and the
Nationalities Intelligence Section. Liaison will follow
in order to obtain samples of the propaganda referred to
above and will again reiterate that we be furnished copies
of communications transmitted to the mailing addresses +{S)

ere Eig
ACE INAS

=a 2 ow


