
--- Page 1 ---
157-10011-10066| | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |
JFK Assassination System Date: - —-7/30/201
Identification Form

Agency Information |

J

AGENCY: SSCIA
RECORD NUMBER: = 157-1001 1-10066

RECORD SERIES: MEMORANDUM

AGENCY FILE NUMBER :

Document Information

ORIGINATOR: ROCK
FROM: ROETHE, JAMES N.
TO.: FILE

TITLE: | FURTHER INFO OBTAINED FROM BREWER, GEORGE

DATE: 02/24/1975
PAGES: 13

SUBJECTS :
ASSISTANCE TO LOCAL POLICE
BREWER, GEORGE
TECHNICAL OPERATIONS
SURVEILLANCE OPERATIONS ©
CIA - WASHINGTON FIELD OFFICE

DOCUMENT TYPE: PAPER, TEXTUAL DOCUMENT
CLASSIFICATION : — Unclassified ‘
RESTRICTIONS: — Consulted; 1A; 3; Donor Restricted
CURRENT STATUS: — Redact
DATE OF LAST REVIEW: = 05/31/1994

OPENING CRITERIA :

COMMENTS : SSCI Box 286, Folder 11

v9.1 t
HW 50955 Docld:32203834 Page i


--- Page 2 ---
Date:05/30/94
. Page:1
> JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM

IDENTIFICATION FORM

AGENCY INFORMATION

AGENCY : SSCIA
RECORD NUMBER : 157-10011-10066

RECORDS SERIES :
MEMORANDUM

AGENCY FILE NUMBER :

DOCUMENT INFORMATION

ORIGINATOR : ROCK
FROM : ROETHE, JAMES N.
TO : FILE

TITLE :
FURTHER INFO OBTAINED FROM BREWER, GEORGE

DATE : 02/24/75
PAGES : 13

SUBJECTS :
r BREWER, GEORGE

~* TECHNICAL OPERATIONS
ASSISTANCE TO LOCAL POLICE
SURVEILLANCE OPERATIONS
CIA - WASHINGTON FIELD OFFICE

DOCUMENT TYPE : PAPER, TEXTUAL DOCUMENT
CLASSIFICATION : U
RESTRICTIONS : 1A, 3, DONOR REST., REFERRED
CURRENT STATUS : X
DATE OF LAST REVIEW : 05/31/94

OPENING CRITERIA :

COMMENTS :
SSCI Box 286, Folder 11

[R] - ITEM IS RESTRICTED

HW 50955 DociId:32203834 Page 2


--- Page 3 ---
COMMISSION ON CIA ACTIVITIES WITHEN THE UNIPED-STATES

Washington, DC 20500 PBb-l{

Nelson A. Rockefeller, David W. Betin,
Chairman February 24, 1975 . Executive Director
John T. Connor ,
C. Douglas Dillon NOTE: Dpeidents iss therct page numbers
Erwin N. Griswold . r ae J
Lane Kirkland iNdiecgted were Net spec freafly
Lyman L. Lemnitzer

Ronatd Reagan

mentrned i rhe Hanser ist.
Edgar F. Shannon, Jr. : :

ve

SECRET/SENSITIVE . — SSCI Box 286, Folder 11 =

MEMORANDUM FOR: FILE

FROM: JAMES N. ROETHE- 7 Record Number 157-10011-10066 —
N ieee ee ee cee at
SUBJECT: Further Information obtained from George Brewer
(See February 18 Interview)
On Monday, February 24, I again spoke with George Brewer in the Commission
offices from approximately 9:00 am until 10:15 am. The following additional
information was obtained.

Technical Operations

in 1960 and 1961, Brewer was primary involved in Bay of Pigs operations (pro-
viding support to the liami Field Office in smuggling friendly Cubans into the
United States). He was engaged in little technical activity during that time.
Between 1962 and 1965, he was involved in approximately 30 technical operations,
only four of which were telephone taps (the rest were mike and wire cases).
During that same perioi four or five other support agents . were also engaged
in technical activities, each performing approximately the same amount of tech-
nical work that Brewer was performing. Some of the agents doing technical work
were Jack Cryer, H and Bill Simpson, the latter being a former in-
structor of Brewer's.
. “quite some time (throughout the 50's).

uw

z E2|
Both Cryer and Simpson had been doing technical work for

: se Cust- 52)

In 1965 or 1966, following President Johnson's Executive Order precluding wire
taps without court order or without approval of the Attorney General in security
cases, technical work performed by Brewer and others at the Washington Field
Office almost stopped completely. Brewer can recall only two taps that were
placed during that period. One of these was placed in a Safe House in the
Washington area, and the other was placed in a New York apartment. in connec-
tion with Project PARAGON. Brewer assumes that the appropriate approvals were
ob<ained prior to his placing these taps. (TTS yaE- (1149-48)

Most of the technical operations in the early 1960's were performed at the re-

quest of the Operations Directorate. While Brewer was not privy to the purpose
for each technical operation that he performed, he believes that many involved

ge CIA HAS NO eas "
SECRET/SENSITIVE DECLASS Feats DucunieAT

“a MAY 94-
‘ (1)CA)

HW 50955 ° DocTa:32203834 “Page 3 ~~


--- Page 4 ---
@ ser sn0100 -~2-
aa

Safe Houses for use by defectors and the wiring of operations assets’ apart-

ments or other premises where conversations with assets | would be forth-

coming. For instance, in 1962 the apartment of a defector (Golitzen) was 4
wired. It was believed that Golitzen had become unhappy with CIA treatment

and was considering leaving the country. A telephone tap was placed on his

phone to attempt to verify this. Brewer believes that these cases involved
positive foreign intelligence gathering as opposed to being Security cases,

From the names of the individuals whose conversations were to be recorded,

Brewer presumes that most of these technical operations|were directed against

foreigners.

Brewer is aware of a few technical operations relating to security. One in-
volved the bugging of the premises of a former employee
about 1964 because of his questionable associates. Anothex, in 1963, involved
a telephone tap on a newsman (although Brewer was unaware at the time the tap ;
was placed that it was being directed against a newsman) . (1/49)

The Technical Division of the Office of Security may haye been involved in og
some technical operations in the United States during the 1960's and earlier. — {
However, their primary responsibility was counter-audio|/work overseas. Brewer
does not believe that they would have been involved in significant amounts of

technical work in the States. : Aes pe CRD ‘cal ‘
To Aik Bice eage, + (BL bet ow ae p09 eer Ter berel ef TA eee re ee 2 WS s)
J . : Dee fix ’
y Surveillance Operations ‘
Prior to 1968, the Washington Field Office was performing some unsophisticated
surveillance. This generally related to surveillance of defectors and training L

operations directed against perspective overseas CIA agents. The purpose of

the training was to assist WFO in its surveillance techniques and to determine
how wel] the perspective overseas agents could make contacts and "drops" without
being detected. The Field Office had little equipment to undertake sophisticated

surveillance at that time. (de -ab)

In 1968, with the creation of the Surveillance and Technical Unit, a much more
concentrated effort was made in the area of surveillance. (27)

Assistance to Local Police

Brewer remembers that at some point in time two sets of) alias documents prepared
by Technical Services were given to the Metropolitan Police Department. This
included a social security card, driver's license, D. C. permit, etc.

REE KRERERE

I again interviewed Mr. Brewer at approximately 2:30 pm on the same day, just
rior to his leaving for the Commission hearings, at which he was testifying.
indicated that it was the policy of the CIA to offer gratuities to various -

4 .

SECRET/SENSITIVE

HW 50955 Docld: 32203834 _Page 4


--- Page 5 ---
SECRET/SENSITIVE -3- |
police officers in the Washington, D.C., area for their assistance to the CIA.
Each Christmas a list would be prepared of those individuals from local police
departments who had provided assistance,and appropriate gifts would be given
to these individuals, ranging from candy and liquor to $25 gift certificates.
The money for these gifts was taken from CIA's "Blue Jay" fund, used for mis-
cellaneous expenses. Some police officials would not accept such gratuities.
pete AS a
‘Brewer 5 algo aware of one occasion when police officials from several de-
partments were flown to a hunting lodge owned by the Agency in southern Virginia.
‘Brewer recalls several officers from the Montgomery County, Fairfax County (in-__
Tl@iener)s and Metropolitan Police Department s(including(suarite!
Gites, but not (Ghixeiealikiaiston’-who refused an invitation) attending, as well
gh police official from Boston. Brewer himself attended this gathering
and indicated that as best as he can remember it was strictly a social affair.
Brewer could not recall ever having agreed to providef . j of the
Fairfax County Police Department with an automobile while’ as on vaca-
tion in calms although he would not deny that he may have done so.
CHD AGIA
Brewer indicated that all gratuities given police officials were approved by
Headquarters and that none were specifically connected with any particular
request being made of the police by the CIA. CLF )

(full distribu tion)

SINR/varr
SECRET/SENSITIVE

HW 50955 Docld:32203834 Page 5



--- Page 6 ---
: ° COMMISSION ON CIA ACTIVITIES WITHIN THE UNITED STATES
Washington, DC 20500

February 20, 1975

SECRET/SENSITIVE
MEMORANDUM FOR: FILE
FROM: _ JAMES N. ROETHE ; \_.
SUBJECT: Summary of an Interview with George R, Brewer, Conducted
. on Tuesday, February 18, 1975, ia the Offices of the
Commission by James N, Roethe ani Robert Olsen
The interview commenced at approximately 4:00 pm on February 18, 1975, and

ended at approximatelty 8:30 pm on the same date. Mr. Brewer appeared
voluntarily at the request of the Commission staff.

Background of Mr. Brewer

Mr. Brewer is a graduate of the University of Maryland. He has been with

the CIA for over twenty years and is presently Chief of the Director's

Security Staff. The interview concerned itself primarily with the activities
of the Washington Field Office of the Office of Security. Mr, Brewer first
worked in that office from January 1955 to February 1956, -From February 1956
to April 1959 he was on Director Dulies' personal security staff. He served
with the Headquarters Field Office (now defunct) from April 1959 to August: 1950
and again served with the Washington Field Office from August 1960 to July 1973,
when he obtained his present position.

Activities at the Washington F

ield Office

The Washington Field Office is made up of 35-40 agents. Clericais bring the
total cf employees to about 100. It is by far the iargest security field
office. The majority of the agents are designated as field agents, whose
primary activity is investigating applicants for ermployisent with the Agency
and some covert investigations (investigations under cover, such as investi-
gations of contractor's employees or individuals planning to be sent overseas
under cover). The remaining agents are designated as s <5 (about §
men) who provide a broad range of support to the fiel agents, 1 1966
Mr. Brewer, a support agent, was designated as the Wasningten Field Office's
liaison with the local police {including the Metropolitan Police Department ,
most suburban police departments, and the Virginia and Maryland State Police).
In November of 1968, Mr. Brower was placed in charge of a newly created
"Surveillance and Technical Unit" of the Support Squad. He remained in both
positions until he left the Office in July of 1973. Mr. Brewer emphasized
that no activity was undertaken by the ficld office without the approval of
eadquarters. Requests for action in Mr. Brewer's areas of interest would be
eceived by headquarters security, generally from the Operations Directorate,
The "Security Support 3ranch" at headquarters would vass the request on to the

4
; _SECRET/SENS ITIVE

HW 50955 DocId:32203834 Page 6



--- Page 7 ---
HW 50955

‘SECRET/SENSITIVE - 2-

“Assistant Special Agent in Charge of Support" at the field office (Mr. John
Hutchinson during most of Mr. Brewer's tenure), who in turn would ask
Mr. Brewer to carry out the request,

The following persons have headed the Washington Field Office as "Special

Agent- in-Charge":

Charles Kane 1960-1963

Marvin Gentile 1963-1964
f John Noble 1964-1968
H Ed Klippa 1968-1975
: Jack Cryer Present

Covert Investigations by Field Agents

Such investigations w ere conducted much less frequently than overt investiga-
tions of applicants for employment. Several unofficial covers were used by
investigators to prevent the person being investigated from being exposed as
a CIA contact.

Technical Operations

|

Technical operations consisted of the planting of electronic listening devices
(King) and the telephone taps (Queen). No technical devices were planted by
the Washington Field Office after the formation in 1968 of the "Surveillance
and Technical Unit.” However, Mr. Brewer has plauted technical devices prior
to 1968:

1.

a

Décla:32203834 Page 7

In about 1966 Mr. Brewer planted a listening device in an apartment
at the Savoy Apartments in Washington, D. C. (a CIA Safe House). This
device was later removed and Brewer was told it was never used,

About 8 years ago Mr. Brewer placed several bugs in a Washington Safe
House. He believes they have never been removed. They have never been
used to his knowledge.

About 10 years ago Mr. Brewer was called back from vacation to bug 4
cadillac to be used by two Chinese generals.

At one time Mr. Brewer bugged hotel rooms in the Washington area where
unwitting U-2 pilot applicants were being interviewed.

In 1963 Mr. Brewer placed telephone taps on phones in a home in
Washington (MOCKINGBIRD case). At the time he did not know he was
tapping a news columnist's phone, but he later learned that that had
been the case.

Four houses in Miami were bugged by Mr. Brewer shortly after the Bay of
Pigs incident.

SECRET/ SENSITIVE

1
i
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
i



--- Page 8 ---
SECRET/SENSITIVE - 3-
7. A hotel room in Los Angeles was bugged by Brewer several years ago. It

was to be used for some kind of interview.

8. -A-home-in Bethesda, Maryland, was also bugged before being occupied by a
Cuban National.

77 Sy TERM AN OO ETT

|
In all, Mr. Brewer believes he was involved in more than ten technical opera-
tions, but less than 100 prior to 1968. In all cases he was merely supplying
technical support for operations at the request of his superiors, and was not
witting to the actual operation. In each case he assumed the propriety and
lawfulness of the operation. :

Since 1966, Mr. Brewer has been engaged in only one technical operation

(Operation PARAGON--threat against Director Helms and Vice President Agnew).
When that threat was made, Brewer suggested that a line be run into the in-
forming agent's apartment. Such a line was run from that agent's telephone

(a telephone tap). This operation was approved by higher authority.

Surveillance

Surveillance was conducted off and on through the period from 1960 to 1973,
However, active surveillance did not begin until 1968 when the "Surveillance
and Technical Unit" was formed. Prior to 1968, surveillance was restricted
to training exercises and surveillance of defectors. Mr. Brewer estimated
that he engaged in about ten such operations prior to 1968. Training sur-

( veillance continued after 1968, but only one.surveillance of a defector was
made during that time.

In 1966 Headquarters requested that the Washington Field Headquarters form a
sophisticated surveillance unit. Such a unit was not really created until
Brewer took over the "Surveillance and Technical Unit" in 1968. After 1968
surveillance took up a large part of the time of the "Surveillance and Techni-
cal Unit's" time. The Unit consisted of 14 support agents and was expanded
to 20-24 men during some surveillances. The Washington Field Office did
surveillance for the entire country with regard to Security Office matters.

If a surveillance was conducted anywhere in the country, Brewer believes he
would know of it. If surveillance was conducted in the territory of another
field’ office, that field office would have been in charge, with the Washington
Office providing the support. The following surveillance was undertaken by
Brewer's Unit:

i

l. Surveillance of Employees or Former Employees

SECRET/SENSITIVE

HW 50955 Docld:32203834 Page 8


--- Page 9 ---
HW 50955

SEGRET/SENSITIVE ~4-

Docld: 32203834 Page 9

. a, A nephew of an assistant to Director McCone was surveilled after he

c. Project TOMCAT: An associate of CAPUSTO was surveilled.

‘d. Project MONEY: A former employee planning to attend the SALT talks

b. Project CAPUSTO (8 Ball): Employee associating with former defector
was surveilled.

“prt Lsgo reee REN ERR OTTEAETAMRETS

eps

with his new boss was surveilled.

ene

e. Project SIESTA: Surveillance on a former employee and the suspected
Castro agent she was living with.

f. Project PINEAPPLE: Surveillance of a former employee living above his
means. Wash»ngton Field Office surveilled outside D.C. Anderson
Associates surveilled in D.C. and at subject's Arlington home. Wash-
ington Field Office did not participate in any break-in of subject's
apartment.

Project AMOS: Former employee surveilled to Champaign, Illinois.

gq
.

h. Project PIXIE: (last job): Two employees and son of another surveilled
for suspected drug use and/or sale.

i. Project PARAGON: Informer who reported threat against Director Helms
and Vice Presiuent Agnew surveilled in New York and Detroit.

MARCHETTI : Former employee threatening to publish classified material
(which he co':ld not have obtained during the course of his employment)
was surveilled. Three cars were used in surveillance. No police cover.

ee

Surveillance of Newsmen (to determine source of security leaks)

|
|
|
|

“ie brewer knew that surveillance was to determine source
ore te cee publishing of classified information. Mr. Brewer ques-
tioned his superior (John Hutchinson) about the case. He wondered why
the FBI was not involved and understood that the FBI didn't want. to
ouch — case (xumor).. Along with (Re Sairietegecin ae omc ca ih

a GENS -were surveilled.

if

Mr. Brewer also questioned this surveillance, but not
} Was relatively unknown. Further, he really didntt
cSaterrwas being surveilled until later.

Other Surveillances

went berserk and threatened to go to the Russians. He was surveilled
for two days.

SECRET/SENSITIVE _


--- Page 10 ---
In all cases of surveillance, photographs of the subject and his contacts
were taken. Further, the identity of the contact was also ascertained and
reported to headquarters. No surveillance was ever placed on a Congressman,
Senator, Judge or Justice or other public figure except the newsmen previously
mentioned. Mr. Brewer believes that there were no cases of surveillance ©
undertaken by his Unit which did not involve either (1) a threatened security
leak: to newsmen, or (2) a potential security violation, except Project
PARAGON.

SECRET/SENSITIVE -5- |
i
i

The records kept on surveillances include the letters assigning the surveil-
lance to the Unit, the agents' logs, photographs taken and the final report
of each project. This information was all sent to Headquarters. The Field
Office would also retain copies but never made any use of these files.

Break-Ins:

7
i
}
;
iz
E

Mr. Brewer's Surveiliance Unit was only involved in one break-in in connection

with Project SIESTA, involving a former employee living with a suspected

Castro sympathizer. A photographic studio, jointly operated by the employee

and her Cuban boy friend, was broken into. This didn't bother Brewer, as

there was strong evidence suggesting a possible security violation. Further,

the suspected pair was soliciting passport photo business at CIA,which would

give them information about the travels of CIA agents. A second break-in

was effected by Anderson Associates (a CIA proprictary) in Project SIESTA. °

Brewer doesn't know who headed up Anderson Associ‘ites, He believes that

Ralph True, Joe Langen and Don Connor may have hac. some connection with it.

Mr. Brewer's Surveillance Unit was disbanded in June or July of 1972. Brewer
is not sure why the Unit was disbanded. The Washington Field Office still does
training surveillance and surveillance of defectors. There have been no in-
stances (to Brewer's knowledge) of potential employee security leaks since the
Surveillance Unit was disbanded.

Activity with Dissident Groups

On three occasions (in 1969, 1970 and May 1971) the CIA participated with the
Washington police in monitoring peace and anti-war demonstrations. In each
~Sase—a request was made by the Washington Police Department (MPD), through

: ers for assistance. The Washington Field Office of CIA
furnished six vehicles with communications gear and men to operate the gear.

Mr. Brewer believes that two CIA agents and one police officer occupied each
car. (More CIA agents than police were utilized,as MPD didn't have the neces-
sary manpower.) The only purpose of this operation was to monitor the move-

ments of the crowds. There was no attempt to penetrate any dissident organi-
zation or to photograph the crowds. The CIA agents involved in the May 1,i971,

operation carried police ID's. CIA also provided a fully-staffed communicea-
tions center at MPD to receive comunications from the cars. This provided

MPD a second radio frequency and freed PD's own channels for other police

business,

- '. SECRET/SENSITIVE

HW 50955 DocId:32203834 Page 10


--- Page 11 ---
+ SECRET/SENSITIVE ~6-

Brewer believes that the primary purpose of this operation was to render
“communications assistance to the local police. The secondary purpose was

to monitor crowds sc as to protect CIA installations. (For example, MPD

had obtained some information that various dissident groups planned to picket
CIA Headquarters and planned to harass Director Helms during a planned. speech.)
All of these CIA operations were verbally approved by Headquarters Support
Branch (Mr. Cryer). Total period of time devoted to monitoring dissident. groups
with MPD (for all three occasions) was about five days. Brewer is not aware of
any instance where the Washington Field Office tried to penetrate any dissident
groups.

Collection of Information on Dissident Groups

During the period of the demonstrations in 1969-1971, all field offices and
resident agents were requested by Headquarters to look out for literature

and other informatior which might in any way affect the CIA. No conscious
intelligence gathering of literature was requested.. Items to be looked for
included campus news clippings, etc.. This project was not a continuing one
over the three-year period when most demonstrations occurred. It was renewed _
from time to time as flare-ups in activity occurred. Mr. Brewer does not know
the quantity of material collected or the use made of that material. The only
information that Brewer knows was collected by the Washington Field Office
consisted of the weekly intelligence summary prepared by: MPD. Headquarters
specifically asked Brewer to get the summaries (either Jack Cryer, Tex Mills
or Curt Rivers) ,and they were forwarded to Headquarters. No effort was made
by Brewer to obtain information concerning any dissident group's intended
activities.

Police Cover Operations

Mr. Brewer indicated that Washington Field Office agents have received police
cover from the following police departments:

1, Metropolitan Police Department (MPD) During the May 1971 demonstra-
tions, MPD furnished ID's to those CIA agents monitoring the crowds along
with police officers. These ID cards were in fact used. No other police
cover was obtained from MPD.

2. Fairfax Citv Police Denartment: In connection with Operation SIESTA
(which included a break-in at the photographic studio in Fairfax City,
operated by a suspected Castro Agent) cover was obtained from the police.
One CIA agent was given a Fairfax City police badge in case some one
walked in on the break-in. The badge was never utilized. Brewer didn't
actually remember obtaining this badge, but it was obtained by some one.

SECRET/SENS ITIVE

HW 50955 DocId: 32203834 Page i1


--- Page 12 ---
“SECRET/ SENSITIVE -7-

3. Fairfax County Police Department: Apparently undercover CIA agents in the
county (under DOD cover) were being continuously harassed and challenged
in the county while on operations. They feared their cover might be
blown and felt it would be good to have police cover to prevent this
from occurring. Mr. Brewer himself may have suggested getting badges and
identification from the county police. In any event, he thought it was a
good idea and Headquarters approved it (per John Hutchinson, Assistant
Special Agent in Charge of the Washington Field Office). eae
(Catter part of 1971) Brewer went tow faves ik ASS: om

Epa Liam. Durneses : ‘I
Sone badges and’ elvant ted. MMT vas originally
reluctant to give CIA the badges and ID, but in early spring of 1972 he

changed bis mine and relented. Brewer does nct know if Osborn called

a fr] or if there was any arm- twis tatig by the CIA. Brewer himself

did no. arm-twisting. Nine patrolman's badges and one sergeant's badge

were obtained, plus ten blank ID cards. The true names of CIA agents

were placed on the cards by Bre it was understood that if the badges
and ID's were ever used that k@ Dw would immediately be notified.

In fact, they were kept in a Safe at Washingten Field Office Headquarters

and never used. They have recently been returned to Fairfax County.

No police cover was ever obtained by Washington Ficld Office, or used by them
for the purpose of performing police activity. Brewer stated that local police
were always kept informed of CIA activities in their jurisdiction.

; Other Assistance Rendered CIA by Lecal Police

cS spec

Project SIESTA:

This project involvec the break-in into a photographic: shop in Fairfax City.
Three Fairfax City police assisted in the operation. One entered the apart-
ment with several CIA agents; one stood watch on the front steps; and one
waited in a squad car outside the building. Much material in the photographic
studio was photographed. Surveillance was constantly maintained on the opera-
tors, of the studio: while the break-in was being carried out.

Use of Fairfax County Facilities:

On at least one occasion the Fairfax County police station was used | for CIA
training purposes. CIA desired to assure themselves that new recruits for
covert overseas duty could not be "broken" if siezed by foreign authorities.
Consequently, CIA officials would "arrest" these unwitting recruits on some
bogus charge and take them to Fairfax County jail where they would be subject
to strong interrogation to see if they would "break".

SECRET/SENSITIVE

HW 50955 Docld:32203834 Page 12



--- Page 13 ---
' SECRET/SENSITIVE - 8-

Other Assistance oo. a : ’

Almost every police department has agreed to immediately notify the CIA if
one of its agents is arrested.

Assistance Rendered to Local Police by the CIA

Training Programs:

In late 1971 a course in photography was offered to officers of local police
departments by the Washington Field Office, and in 1972 courses in both sur-
veillance techniques and photography were offered. Representatives from MPD
and most large suburban police departments attended. These courses were
stopped after the printing of a New York Times article criticizing the train-
ing of New York City police by the CIA.

Metropolitan Police Department:

1. May Day - 1971: MPD was furnished six cars equipped with communications
gear, plus two men for each car,from the Washington Field Office (WFO).
WFO also furnisheda central communications command post plus operators.
The purpose of this assistance was to permit the monitoring of crowds.

2. In about 1972, Brewer performed a telephone tap for MPD in connection
with an interna} affairs matter where eleven police officers were poten-
tially involved .n a bribe. Brewer undgrstood that a_ court order was
obtained before the taps were put on. fa@ane Scmaneer of MPD made

3. During 1969 demonstrations, a@apie:
if he could wire a lamp in the aparc citting police informant
who had penetrated anti-war dissident groups. Breyer passed this re-
quest on to security headquarters, and the Technical Services Division
performed the wiring. CIA did not monitor or receive copies of any con-
versations recorded.

>

‘Shortly after a CIA surveillance training course which several MPD
‘officers attended, MPD became desirous of maintaining surveillance on

one of its unwitting police informants to see if she was doing what the
police paid her to do. MPD asked Brewer if his men would assist the new
-trainees in the project. Brewer's surveillance unit did furnish assist-
ance, including four cars and at least one man for each car. These CIA
agents, together with MPD officers, surveilled the subject for one and one-
half days. ‘his is the only time Brewer's surveillance team actually
provided manpower to assist MPD in a surveillance.

S ECRET/SENSITIVE

\

HW 50955 Docld:32203634 Page 13


--- Page 14 ---
+ SECRET/SENSITIVE -9-

‘5, On two or. three occasions between 1970 and 1972 the Washington Field
Office loaned the MPD Morals Division a device to. ta touch-tone“~
telephone. The request came from Finer momen elma) and Fuemele

Ghomane- Ed Sayle of CIA was CIA's contact with se aiomany for

equipment requests. Dollard or Foran would call Sayle, who in turn

would direct Brewer to provide the equipment.

1 pty Mmm paremenc rea somapmtmcm ne

6. On two or three occasions between 1970 and 1972, Sayle directed Brewer
to provide receiving devices to MPD. Once Sige

sonally contacted Brewer and requested a receiver. It was provided
(ostensibly for training purposes).

7, On several occasions covert miniature transmitters were furnished to
MPD on an indefinite loan.
8. The Washington Field Office also gave MPD personnel technical advice
on use of double tape machines and ‘advice on photography from time to
time.
MPD received no assistance from the Washington Field Office when they set up
their Intelligence Division in 1967-68. No other assistance was ever rendered é
MPD concerning solving particular crime or interrogating a particular witness. i

Sometime after Director Schlessinger became DCI, the MPD was asked to return
all equipment previously loaned: to it by the CIA,and most was returned. Appar-
ently a list of this equipment has been prepared. (The list may include other
police departments as well).

Montgomery County Police Department

In about 1970, Mr. Brewer joaned some transmitters to tins } BS: ins
and GiROMGlEr eof the county police. They had already been loaned some re~-
ceivers before Brewer came with the Washington Field Office.

Fairfax County Police Department

lL. Years ago the county was given an old Ampex 601 recorder equipped to take
- a telephone tap off a dial phone.

2. On one occasion Brewer accompanied a county police representative to U.S.
Recording on S. Capitol Street to help him pick out a dial recorder for
telephone taps.

3. In 1969-70, Brewer loaned some photographic equipment to the county police
forces intelligence unit. The equipment has never been returned.

No personne] have ever been loaned to the county. No assistance has ever been

given concerning a specific crime or witness.

SECRET/SENSITIVE

HW 50955 Docld:32203634 Page 14



--- Page 15 ---
‘SECRET/SENSITIVE _ - 10 -

Ly
&

Other

li Ih 1969 or 1970 metal detection demonstrations were given at CIA Head-
quarters to representatives of all Virginia and Maryland Police Depart -
ments.

2. Director Helms owned a beach house near Lewes, Delaware. On one occasion
Brewer net with the chief of police there concerning the security of the
beach house, as Helms had been receiving threats. Apparently Osborn gave
the police chief a box of flares and other equipment (as a gift to the
department) for the chief's assistance.

KRREREKREREK

At some point during the interview, Mr. Brewer indicated that he had not
discussed his testimony with any representative of the Agency prior to the
interview--except the General Counsel.

IMPRESSIONS

Mr. Brewer was originally somewhat reluctant to be interviewed and at one
point was considering whether he should retain a liwyer. However, as we
went along he opened up considerably to the point where I now believe I have
a pretty good understanding of the Office of Security's Washington Field
Office. It would appear that the Washington Field Office did conduct much,
if not most, of the physical and technical surveillance directed against
American citizens subsequent to 1968. In every case the surveillance was
directed by higher authority. It also appears thet the Washington Field
Office gave substantial assistance to local police departments in the Wash-
ington, D. C. area. Much of this assistance was odviously an appropriate
exchange of information between two intelligence units. Most disturbing is
the incident where CIA agents assisted NPD officers in a bona fide police
surveillance (a law enforcement function), but this seems to have been an
isolated case.

JNR/vnr

SECRET/SENSITIVE

HW 50955 Docld: 32203634 Page 15

