
--- Page 1 ---
157-10014-10117| | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |
JFK Assassination System Date: VT2015

Identification Form

. Agency Infotmati on

AGENCY:  SSCIA
RECORD NUMBER: — 157-10014-10117 }

RECORD SERIES: | MISCELLANEOUS RECORDS OF THE CHURCH COMMITTTEE

AGENCY FILENUMBER: 07-M-23 . :

Document Information

ORIGINATOR: SSCIA
FROM:
TO: i

TITLE: RICHARD GOODWIN BINDER

DATE: — 00/00/1975
PAGES: 103

SUBJECTS :
ANTI-CASTRO ACTIVITIES

DOCUMENT TYPE: REPORT
CLASSIFICATION: — Declassified
RESTRICTIONS: 1B; IC
CURRENT STATUS: — Redact
DATE OF LASTREVIEW: 03/21/2000

OPENING CRITERIA :

COMMENTS : CCBOX 453

vo4 1

HW 50955 BocId: 32423505 Page i


--- Page 2 ---
08/07/95
1

JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM
IDENTIFICATION FORM -

AGENCY INFORMATION

AGENCY : SSCIA
RECORD NUMBER : 157-10014-10117
RECORDS SERIES : MISCELLANEOUS RECORDS OF THE CHURCH COMMITTTEE

AGENCY FILE NUMBER 07-M-23 J

DOCUMENT INFORMATION

SSCIA
i

i
RICHARD GOODWIN BINDER
00/00/75

103

ANTI-CASTRO ACTIVITIES

i.

i
i
1
1

FROM

|
ei
H
c
ta

SUBJECTS

1
i
{
i
i
\

DOCUMENT TYPE : REPORT
CLASSIFICATION : TOP SECRET
RESTRICTIONS : REFERRED
CURRENT STATUS : POSTPONED IN FULL
DATE OF LAST REVIEW : 01/05/99 ;
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS : CCBOX 453

{R] - ITEM Is RESTRICTED

HW 50955 Docld:32423505 Page 2


--- Page 3 ---


--- Page 4 ---
M.

4/26/61
5/2/61

5/4/61
5/5/61
5/24/61

6/10/61
7/8/61
9/1/61

11/1/61

11/2/61

y4/on.

11/22/61

8/10/62

8/13/62

8/14/62

5/27/75

HW 50955 DocId: 32423505 Page 4

TABLE OF CONTENTS _

GOODWIN TESTIMONY NOTEBOOK

Summary on Richard Goodwin by DiGenova.

Memo to Bundy re "Cuba Problem" from Goodwin.

Memo to: Goodwin re "Possible Covert Activities against
Cuba," from Bissell.

~ Draft of NSC Action No. 2413,

Draft: Record of Actions, 483rd NSC meeting (5/5/61)..

Menorandum of Conversation with Dick Bissell, Tracy

‘Barnes,; by Goodwin.

4
1

Memorandum for the President re ''CIA Reorganization,"

from Schlesinger. .

Memorandum for Mr. Richard Goodwin re ''Cuban Covert
Plan,"' from Schlesinger. ~

Memorandum to the President re Cuban Task Force

‘Meeting, 8/31, from Goodwin.

Memorandum to the President, "Eyes Only for the
President ," re concept of a "command operation" for
Cuba, from Goodwin. ;

Memorandum, Eyes Only for the President and the
Attorney General," re "operation should be organized —
with five staff components," from Goodwin. :

Memo, "Eyes Only,'' re recommendations that ''the Cuban
Operation be organized. in five components." .
Memorandum to Sec. of State, Sec. of Defense, Director
of CIA, AG, Gen. Taylor, Gen. Lansdale, Richard Goodwin
re'’...summary of the major decisions which have been
made ini regard to the Cuba Operations" from Goodwin.

Memorandum for Record re "Minutes of Meeting of Special
Group | (Augnented) on Operation MONGOOSE, 10 August, 1962.

Nenordndum for William Harvey, CIA, Robert Hurwitch, |
State, Gen. Benjamin Harris, Defense , Don Wilson, USIA
re "Alternate Course B," from Lansdale. :

Memorandum for Deputy Director (Plans) re "Operation
MONGOOSE , " from Harvey.

Summary of Goodwin Interview w. Aaron re “Intelligence
Activities in Latin America." _


--- Page 5 ---
. i

| a.) : i |

| ry . i
|

Table of Contents - 2,

fo Q. ; 6/10/75 Szule Testimony before SSC, excerpt.

T/A7/75 Summary of documents produced by Goodwin on T8175,
by Dennin. :
: S. / 13/61 — Menor kndum to Goodwin re "CIA Covert Activities in

the Dominican Republic."

: T. 5/29/61 Drafts and original of cable from State Dept. to
| . (date of cable) Dearborn.

i
1
1
t

‘

HW 50955 Docld:32423505 Page 5


--- Page 6 ---
July 17, 1975

To:  F.A.O. Schwarz/Curtis smothers

From: * Joseph E. DiGenova

Re: Richard Goodwin Materials -and Summary

‘Summary

. |
A. Goodwin Interview of July 16, 1975
Mr. Goodwin was interviewed for a second time
on,July 16, 1975. He indicated that he chaired the "Cuba

i
Task Force" after the Bay of Pigs. Paul Nitze had pre-
t

viously chaired the group. It was this Cuba Task Force
that suggested the establishment of the Lansdale project.
In this regard, Goodwin noted that Lansdale proved to be
‘very efficient. Goodwin indicatea that he was present

during the conversation ‘between President Kennedy and Tad

Szulc concerning the question of assassinating Castro. goo
(See Szulc's testimony infra.) | He spoke with ‘the President
after that conversation and remembers JFK saying about
assassination: "We can't get into that -- we'll all be
targets." He noted’ that Bissell never mentioned anything
to him, Goodwin, about assassination attempts. With regard i

i Be

to the August 10, 1962, meeting, which he attended, Goodwin a

t

wate

HWS0955 Docld:32493505 Page 6



--- Page 7 ---
noted that McCone never made any oration upon the: immorality

rr ; ;
of assassinating Castro. He remembered the August 10 meet-
at °

ing and said that "assassination was not shot down". When

. 7 t 7
pressed for details at this point, and after being shown

the Lansdale (8/13/62) and Harvey (8/14/62) memoranda, he

. i
said he wanted to think about the meeting before he made

any more statements about who gaid and did what. He noted, —

however, that in 1966 while in/Peru with Robert Kennedy that
. _ ' oy
Kennedy, in a fleeting retort to a series of questions
. . { :
about U. S. assassination attempts against Castro, said
t .

"Tell him (the interpreter) I saved his (Castro's) life."
. . , . ed

At the conclusion ofthe interview he turned over

to the Committee various documents related to Cuba which he

had found in his personal papers. Those are apperided to.

this summary..

'B. Goodwin Interview of May 27, 1975 ; : : —

During the course of this earlier’ interview, f
Goodwin alluded to the Cuba Task Force. According to the

Committee notes of that interview, the discussion went as

follows: :
; ‘
In general, Goodwin had not heard much
specific talk of assassination, although
it would not have|surprised him if it had
gone on. He ment loned one specific in-
stance in which he had heard talk of
}
mS - —_ ~

HW 50955 Docld: 33923505 “Page 7


--- Page 8 ---
assassinating Castro. After the Bay of

Pigs, a Cuba Task Force was established,
first chaired by Paul Nitze and then by
Goodwin in his capacity as White House

Staff Officer.

At a.meeting of the Task

Force, held at the State Department,
McNamara suggested “getting rid of Castro",
someone from the CIA, perhaps Bissell,

then asked if McNamara meant "Executive |

Action".

McNamara responded that he did

and stressed his interest in the idea.
However, Goodwin did not bring the topic
up later in the meeting after McNamara

left.

Cc. The Goodwin Documents

(See interview infra.)

The documents which Mr. Goodwin has furnished

the Committee are of no startling significance. one docu-
| ; . :

ment, the May 2, 1961, memorandum from Bissell to Goodwin,

. - |
is noteworthy because it does not advise him of the Roselli

connection or the efforts to assassinate Castro. Bissell

notes, "I have not attempted to, provide you with much

detail." A May 24, 1961, Memorandum of Conversation with

Bissell by Goodwin does not mention any reference by Bissell

to actions against Castro on th
Arthur Schlesinger memorandum 9
President discusses the need fo

gence set-up" of the United Sta

e assassination front. An
f June 30, 1961, to the
x revamping of the "intelli-

tes. In a footnote in that

memorandum, Schlesinger notes that the CIA is not ‘able to

control its operatives once they are in the field and of

the attendant dangers this poses. (See page 6 of the memo.)

Wi 50955 DocId:32423505 Page 8.



--- Page 9 ---
HW 50955

The other documents indicate the thinking that went on up

to

the coordinated effort against

the point where the Lansdale group was established as
poe ;
t

Cuba.

Areas of Inquiry for Goodwin
: i

What, if anything, does Goodwin remember of the August
10, 1962, meeting of the Special Group which he attended?

Is this meeting different than the meeting he refers to
in his initial interview where McNamara broached the sub-
ject of assassinating Castro? Or has he simply confused
them and are they one and the same?

|
How does he explain McCone' $ recollection of having given
an oration on the immorality of assassinating Castro when
it was brought up at the August 10 meeting?

Was McNamara the person who brought ‘up the subject at
that meeting?

What discussion, if any, followed?

DocId: 32423505 Page 3



--- Page 10 ---
~~ sk

‘“MEMOR ANDUM

* To: McGeorge Bundy
From; Dick Goodwin

Here are a few scattered thoughts

Sis

c

RET

a

on the "Cube" peoblom,

Cuba io a threat to the eccurity of tho United Stntes in eve basic waysi

1, Asa direct military me

- be intensified aa communist ar

oe Yas erage which will

t Tewevex, even this

increased danger will bo minimal, Ob: troaty onligati muiS ¢.cnmisus to tho-

defense of any American naficn which
. micé

attacked directly. Any militar,

cet

moves by Castro could bY inumedia ately by our forces, Cimilavly we ceuld

intervene in case of Gastro military aid to queria opevctions in the Americas.

2. As an exporter of revolution:

Thevze ia no coutt that Cuba is being

used as a base for export of the coramurist-fidelista revolution. This is

done through the actual supply of fs funda and technical assistance to inourgent

clements, through widespread and reasons)
: - : i
including a news scrvice and radio netvork od ¢

example of the allinnce between fidcligme and nc

identification with cu +

ifare of the people.

aki ay eciective pro opaganda apparatus

the use of Cuba as an

cial veform +~-

This thecat is significant ~- eapeciclly in the Carzvibean area. However,

even here, in the las siz months there has been a significant decline in Cuban

effectiveness, This has come because of the growing isdlation of communist-«

fiodlista elements fram tho Democrati

HW 50955 DocId:32423505 Page 10

:

cloftas Cc

Castro's pro-Govict bont has



--- Page 11 ---
, ote,
i SEORET
: . a
; become qwore apparent; ani as Castro bac become iasres. Ss
- his peysorcl tehnvioz. T Ingact, that, the comune sists ave
looking écz anothers more stable, hers -- porhaps Cardenas of tanlece
3. While ng influence of Gdelisne over popular
_ movemcnts; ub does not necessarily logeea the importa: eo.of CubaneSovict- *.,
‘Chinese material an fo moyglotionssy movernerts. Te dade
; portant to r¢ otro wer
; mes have solved the proriem ct communis’
most of the greniest Caaves opets {5,G, Northeast Brasil, Celumbin back
countrys cormmaunist gorainated stagent CAUVOLRENS, ClUe) do not owe elthes
tout Lleadesobip.
ss ; ‘Thies danger has bees sponty growl
erected Gourse of Ac

a any fashion, We needa

VIVE

covaziste nesosgraent of Cas vulnerability of his regime -- the cores of

popular supe ort, the probably doshining position of the Cuban economy ond
its impact on the Cutan peopte, tho efficiency of his police state, the possi-

bilities of underground orpanization, cic. Without guek on asccass nents it 43,

mw 5 ar . . . . .
0955 Docld: 32423505 Page 11 . |


--- Page 12 ---
S=aCREet

pol, , - = Zw
impossible to realistically determine wint alternative cousses of action oro a
- open to ude

2. To mect tho military thront wo can work out defense agreoments

with Centyal American nitions along the Mags cuggested with Profosaor Berle,
3. We should approach the government of Chile to coil an Inter-Amorican . |

. :

. arms limitation conference. This conference should dcal with mothods of
: i .

stopping external arms shipmeuts in the context of the over-all Nmitations

which are desparately necdod in Latin America, We chould decide, before

f .
this mecting, whother tae risks in an OAS blockade of arms chipmonts to Cuba

are outweighed by tho dangers involved in halting and cearching international
a ;

i

shipping.

4, Immediately consult with heads of major nations in Latla Amavica
; , ;

|

to see how far they are willing to go in'tezme of collective action, This chould

. i
be done via a personal emissary. Although we should have a reasonably cleay

i

H wn

idoa of what we want to do, this should bo = genuine consultation among cilies.

All the myried proposals for OAS actioa, ctc., depend on tha reaction of other _

Latin nations «= a roaction as yot undetermined,

5. Underlying all these proposeis is the fecling that we should not move
{
{

quickly in direct action against Cuba, 'I do net believe that there is any course

; |
of direst action which we can wisely take on the basis of current knowledge and

: a |
conditions. : : .

i

;

HW 50955 Docld:32423505 Page 12



--- Page 13 ---
oh
fttemmnts to st 2 Gasteniom :
° lL, We should provide Cazzine aa Be, Hens with tho techni wh help
le. ge sadoy to spot £ Incoming planes} and 2 navy putrel assictauce to meet the
. danvers of a omns | shicments from Cuba to ineouvrgent elements in ne notion
‘ ©

»

2. Theve are two or tarce vend danvey spots (Ser Doris au Repubtic

ae aA aw tee .
comocratic alternatives to the

S£ wre do not do this

present regime «= orcniiuiog re

then the inevi table ¢hangea in geverameént micy be fetlowad Ly Castro-type

z o ebay ec ttew aes am, oe aegren, os 4 ot. tit
regimes. Whoa Dermocvatic altornutives ave orgauiced we should consider

2
and Duvailer aud possibly Somoze,

racans of preck: aitating the fal

wt mombwun contecl over the tyoo of replacement povern~

in this way we can ox

tment -~ the timing ond initintive should
3, Molp provide counter-prop. tnita ascistance ta Latin governments

: i . .
-- e.g. racio trausraitters, The more!we can work through Demaecwatic-
3 TIT ats

liberal isrees i aluetin America, rather thas through USA alene, the more

eifective will be oar propaganda,

Gur lor agers

arent ia the newly organized & hes anus of Democratic parties.

S oNcu

HW 50955 DocId: 32423505 Page 13 mo |



--- Page 14 ---
stone

protyrescive political rmevements (in

ecpecially i in the less progress

niazes of org auization cown to the

“e

tt
aes 9

ba cove et,

zip sho

c ROVS sacs

takeover, The Alinaua ia procecdiag phout as
organization cf eifert, and tho siagaitade of ava
elements are unsatisfactory. |
|
Mie Bunds: Prasent olons ¢ rovice fow 2

SIGRE?
t a|5 «.
We ahould assist thesa parties o- finauciotly and techateally = to develop

ach

Bses Lreve.

ie

onaly movements,

ive countries) through heloing them ia teche_

warfare, ete,

as apes nettle a
bias proveam with bts

emphasis

o of preveatin

rarmuinist

2.3 alleciution ef 250-350 million

collars worth of cconom weal 1962, This

4s out of = totel of 2, co a tao vocial develope
! .

mont fund}, Cac hundred million of thia willghtete Drasil to net thom ovey

|

thelz curront Unencial crisis, Lam not clear thet ony cubstantiol location
i

could be mace siveu the enormous needs in Asta (ssnecietiy in Indie cad

Pokistan) e« although i bolieve there ew thesa
: we os { s
funds are probably uct Gafiscient te make a veukl and effective start in cconoraic
j .
. |
development, i
i
. a | .

Orgatention: Tf communist tukesver comes in Latta Amerisa it
probabl y we not come through guerilla warlare, but through the capture cf
i

SECRET .

i

4
|
‘
{
{

HW 50955 DocId:32423505 Page 14.



--- Page 15 ---
© g 7 . “dt
14 a & 3 at 6 a '
ce o 8 — a 8 4A G i)
n 8 a3 4 ao 8 4 og i 8
4 s x is £ i . a Kone 2
a Ket 4 oo a 8 9 4 a E 9S A
» 3 & 4 3 Pt a) 3) 9 Ks tr
= bd a 4 8 a 8 5 8 9 2 “ OUOUO# a .
43 og & goa 2 pw gy 3 Bow 4 3 HB
a 3 eo oe 8 4 a8 f @ 8 Y 68
BY ea} e 2 . Per) Q st Ba ea ao &
et Qo [7 a o UW bs a - a : ‘
wa Q a] at x o ot ro) 3 £ “ss
g un Pay « Bs 4 4 ior) a) a ey se od 2 3 o
2 og 2 Ho Og 3 3 & , 8 2 ft 8 8
PRY 2 ro 4 wy #} = uF o st 4L wi (Ss)
ee Mo oO "OG fo 8 8 RB
t i I o wD - . . a y a a ry:
2 PF 8&8 re} 3 4 9 8 wood yoy Rs
aq & sf m 1 9 good ot
am BH S eo fo oo rs o 8
ray 7 oO sO = HOt G o re!
a 3 ol + B 8 8 foe gg Of ¢ 3
oO ° % fe t H aed ay im 2 - : ay
Boe 8 BF 3 8 8 OF g 8 s 8
he 8 6 4 a FF HOE 9 fo8 BOR hr 3
iy 9 ‘S23 re 5 g 8 Bb oa 4 4
es OU B % 8 & o fi “bo, S nat
A rn J 0 of ct nal D> ia v r 6 wet
?2 3 . ’ : ay ag et oO in > wd Ary
{i * 3 o2) ‘ € $ bad 4 a eo. 8 tt
fo 3 * i. ob. U8 me “ 3.8 ® ° a
4B OP Bom FR eR BS 2 f eo 8 8 G
8 4 oa a ” a of od oS
gO Pe ns 2 one ie 3
ao, Sg 8 Ra “ “Bo Bp fa i
3) oe 8 ba an rs 2 a a a oe
3 oy af yg ok i 2 3 cee _
id ey at 1 . & ry 3 2 3 ree To os
Hy 9 ; a n > 9 ges a 8 AS) > . —_
a .- 2 g o£ yg ° a = ts
: u fa) be fi 9 oo a - is
hn aa a 9 S ts S 9 ° Qo ta} 3 roe
a 74 ra ‘ +) 4 be a Ns vl tet
es " 23 s ey =“ oD a] oF “ ct a4
5 a } 4 Qo és + Px) : pa Bo 4 os]
wa a, 4 a pos 8 ‘en F &
33 G set 4 “i ca nm rs] . ‘ g ‘
et Q G 3 ed a rs) 23 tnd 2 ret nt
3 2, 2 8 a ere 3
f + “ 4 ia <t a R ©.
S BP oR RO R Gu 8 8 e 2 e
2 d 8 ° a 3 2) ° Roof & 3 tn
hh $3 a . ¥ ao) ia i ‘s 49 3 aa .
ay #t oy 1 os od oy aa Q
n § : gg th t a 2
q : ° i q og 8 é of
é OOF 2 H “4 a 3 "
9° a Oo i Ay ‘ a 3 Bs i.
8 Soap PB § 4 8 343 B 2 so 8 2
a Goo ¢ 8 4oo6G  O od a a. 8 a
a ral a ca) H fot OS & ooOR QO 2 ra Bx) fy
ra oa 2) u M Bry t uu 3 Pe oO © ray
ra 5 ’ ss ° 03 a 4 A
8 a a od Ba a 8 owe 8 “ “ Qo oth n
q mat 9 *y as) fa = a Q os es be
9 2 oo & a won Q a OS o
> RQ wt oO G a] el
a a % Noo: s
2) - al
ius)

Docla



--- Page 16 ---
2 May L961

MEMORANDUM FOR: Mr. Richard N. Goodwin’
Assistant Special Counsel to the
President ;
SUBJECT: Possible CovertActivities ayainst Cuba

|

Attached is a brief statement regarding covert operations
7 1 o o v

against Cuba, In view of your fan

and our conversations over the pas

attempted to provide you with muc

Attachment: Paper as stated abov

‘
‘

iliarity with this subject

t few days, I have not

i
h detail,
t

lata Bani,

Richard M, Bissell, et
_ Deputy Director
(Plans)



--- Page 17 ---
2 May 1961

po MEMORANDUM FOR: Mr. Richard N. Goodwin
: ; ; Assistant Special Counsel to the

President |

. ' .
{ a) SUBJECT: Possible Covert Activities against Cuba

|

Attached is a brief statement regarding covert operations
against Cuba, In view of your familiarity with this subject

{ : and our conversations over the past few days, I have not cana
.

.
attempted to provide you with much detail.

Richard M, Bissell, Jr.

ok
i
| con 4
(Sirpedy Ritend Bezel, ar,
|
i

roo, , » Deputy Director
a4 / °. (Blans) ;



--- Page 18 ---
2 May 1961

As indicated by the combined INR/ONE estimate, anti-Castro
activity within Cuba will probably be muted at least for the next
several months, Most individuals whose loyalty is in any way

suspect have been arrested, A recent report from the Swiss

Ambassador indicated that political prisoners now number 100, 000,

All internal services will continue to work ou a theory of repression

plus undoubtedly swift and brutal penalties, Consequently, it will be

‘very difficult to.carry on any clandestine operations and it is doubtful wee
; - |

. i .
that such operations can have any significant impact in weakening

the Castro regime,
‘In spite of this, evidence is still available that there is opposition ; |

to the regime among individuals still at large and that such opposition _

is prepared to undertake action despite the risks involved, Moreover,

there are still agents distributed through miost of the six provinces

:
: ; . . 1
and communications can still be had either directly or indirectly with - {

. . . . 7 7
these individuals. At the very least these agents can and will continue i

. . : , . t
to collect information and to transmit it to the Agency. In addition, . |

certain of these individuals, plus some | aaitional ones who might be

infiltrated, could attempt to carry out some sabotage, Individual

acts of sabotage are possible with relatively few men and small

amounts of material, Successive acts 9f sabotage or extensive

Td: 32423505 ‘Page 18


--- Page 19 ---
sabotage operations are more difficult and inevitably more costly in

terms of loss of men, Nevertheless, it would be possible, starting

: . se i
in the near future, to attempt limited sabotage with a view to determining

if

: i
its feasibility and with the hope that gradually an increased program

might be developed.
A capability also exists for types of maritime operations including

1
infiltration and exfiltration of individuals! landing and caching of arivs, . : i
boo
under-water sabotage of shipping and sinall raider operations, Under :
{
present circumstances it would seem wrong to atteinpt. these except on wae

a very limited scale.and,in all likelihood, raider operations should not

be attempted until more information regarding feasibility has been
obtained,
The Agency also has a small air arm including some transport
aircraft (C-54 and C-46 types) plus attack bomber aircraft (B-26).
Although it is not absolutely certain, there is reason to suppose that

, : | .
Cuban crews also are available for operational flights, At the mornent,

: i
air operations should be substantially eliminated with the possible

exception of supply flights to support pppsition elements unable’ to

survive without such support, Even withjrespect to such operations,

however, it should be remembered that the percentage of successful

night drops is extremely limited so that the urgency should be great

a, | .
i ;
to justify the risk, B-26 strikes could, of course, be flown against

chosen targets (e.g. refineries, power plants, tire plants) and, if

mE gps Sa 3


--- Page 20 ---
“

Z
a

WwW 2
merry
ar)
toatl
pad
wz

1M
successful, might have the effect of extensive sabotaye, In. view

. . |
of the risks involved, however, and the poor deniability of U.S.

support where aircraft are involved, lit is recommended that such oy

operations be avoided at least for the present,

Manolo Ray of the MRP has asserted an independent MRP
capability to conduct infiltration, intelligence collection, Sabotage
~ : and defection operations into Cuba, He recognizes a necd for U.S,
support but is very firm in his. desire to operate as independently
as possible of any official U.S. connection, His initial request |

1 ‘
is for five boats, some materiel andisome money. He admits,

however, that, looking ahead, additional support such as real
estate, some help with training and communications will be required,

He offers to share his information with the U.S. Government, seek

U.S, advice and, at least for a period of time, be willing to operate

with the Revolutionary Council, The|Council's views are being

canvassed and Ray has ‘been asked to] prepare a prospectus giving

in some detail his needs for U.S. support for the immediate future :

and the step-up required over a period of time should his efforts -

prove successful,

The Ray proposal should certainly be examined and given support

within reasonable limits if the relationships proposed both with the

Council and with the U.S, are satisfactory,



--- Page 21 ---
“In addition to the activities described above, propaganda
activities such as radio broadcasts and publication of magazines
and newspapers can be continucd independently by the Agency or

in support of Ray or the Revolutionary Council, Moreover, limited

‘political action operations are possible, As to both propaganda

and political action, however, the amount of effort and the type
of activity undertaken will depend to a large extent on the decisions
with respect to the operations described above, Consequently,

these will be noted here as mere possibilities,



--- Page 22 ---
_ Be

Obes vudl yf, [>
UWA, lee.

&

HW 50955 DBoclId:32423505 Page 22

ty lyse

i “4. 3. Be 8- POLICY TOWARD CUBA -
- (bISG Action No. 24l3-cs Memo “for nse, sama subject, dated May 4, 1961)

Agreed that the political objective of U. 8. policy teo~

ward Cuba is to bring about the downfall of the Cestre

regime.

Agrest that the United States should not undertake mil-
{tary intervention in Cuba now, but should do nothing
that would foreclosa the possibility of military inter-

ventiog im the futures tage eS oe

Agreed that the Cuban situation should be kept under Se
constans review, in ‘the light of the possibility that

actions by Castro would prot a reconsideration of

the decieton not te intervenes

Agread that the United States should | not tepose a naval

or air blockade against Cuba at this tine.

Noted the importance the President: artaches to obtain~
ing timely and adequate intelligence 28 to Cuban mili-”
tary capabilities, especially tha enhancesent of such
capabilities by Sino-Soviet Bloc military assistance,

taking inte account the possibility of U. &. inter-

vention at a future Eiue date.

TOP SECRET.


--- Page 23 ---
&e

Be

de

fabri — 49 pisvl

Cuba mako a detailed study of possible weaknesses end os
. yulperabilities in the elements which exert control in

organized in the United States, but that Cuben nationals

DRAFT TOP SECRET

Roted the importance ‘the President attaches to publica}
tion in the Iree World press of tha terroristic actions

of the Castro regime.
taal ar

Noted the President's direction that the Taek Forca on

Cuba today.

al ‘ander t {rection of
woyl¥ prepare a
pordtions = t to Cuba,” ope
{deration of/tkhe Presidedt,

Agreed that no separate Cuben military force should be

for tho

would ba encouraged to enlist in the U. S. armed forces ~
aed trained tn-spectal_units-tonntsting-0f-Sparich-
spcaking-—uotionsis, under a plan te be proeanced by by

the Secretary of Defense in commection with hie review

of U. S. conventional forces, .

r

TOP SECRET



--- Page 24 ---
DRA . TOP SECREE

1 Agreed that Cuban nationals nou in the United States

- will ba given refuges status and assisted, under a.
program te be developed and directed by the Secretary
of Health, Education & Walfera, in carrying. on their
formes oceupations. ‘Refugees now in Mtemt will be .
encouraged te locate in other areas, Cuban nat {onals -

entering the United States will ba given refugee Status.

. Agraed not te impose a) completa trade eabargo on Cuba
for tha present, but 4£ later actions by Castro resulted
in @ decision to do eo, all trade with Cuba would be
stopped. The Secretary of State agraed to send to the :
Frosident maa an analysis of how a U, S. embarge on
trade with Cuba would effect our trade relations with

:, Othez sountsios under the Battle Act.

1. Noted that the President would discuss with Canada the
position of Genadian subsidiaries of U. 8. corporations
in the event of U. S. impositions in trade embargoes

a Cuba, .

‘ oo
m. Agreed that tha United States ghould at once initiate
negotiation te enlarge the willingness of other Ameri~

can states to join in bilateral, maltdletoral and GAS

., aetengenants te quarantine Castro, such as a) breaking
 Atplomatie relations with Cubas (2) coatrolling



--- Page 25 ---
Be

Qe

Re

any be . .
Poclda: 327423505 Page 25

DRAFE _. POP SECREE

gubveroive activities of Gubsn agents} (3) preventing ©

arms shipmaats te. Gastro; (4) Limiting economic rala- center
tions with cabes, (5) creating & Caribbean security

forces} (6) taittating a naval patrol to prevent Cuban
Anvasion of other staces ia the Caribbean; and (7) de-
nunatation of Costre as an ageat of international com=

mumion by eel all nations of this hemisphere.

Agracd that the Alliance ‘Yor Progress should be

atrangthensd by guch measures 68 (i) rapid inplementa=

thon of selected goctal developnont projects; (2) ace

| ealeration of! ‘hie ‘teplenentation of other Latin Amex=

dean aidy and (3) provision of aiditional resources

for Batin Anexlean economic and social developmants
_ tneluding consideration ¢ of a supplemental approprias . : _ cop

 ¢hom for development loans.

&. aforaation Agency would pa

expand its exiating progran ia Latin America rather

Agreed that the U.

then initiats electronic warfaxe egeiost the Castro
regime. ’ ; Le
Di phte we ih Lot

Agreed that U. S. military | officers, ynder genedal

guidance so ba prepared by tha Department of state,

would discuss, the Castro threat £0 ali Latin Americ 7

. with Latin. Anarican 0 officers.



--- Page 26 ---
nDRAEF TOP SECRET

tate should prepere &

cb! Agreed thas the secretary of 8

. Ge
f report om & possible | ‘new Juridical basis for effec>

‘sive antiecemmmniat action.

Tun D CAN REPUBL, RA

if, Vp 8. POLICE TAd
!
Task Force on Cuba would prepare procptly

Agreed that the
both emergency aud longerange plans for anti-commnist

dararvent Lom ia the ovent of crises in

Dominican Republics noted the President
t initiate the overthrow of -

Haiti or the

tg wiew that’

tha United States should no

Trujillo befere we knee what governsent would auecead

any * action against Tenjtlle should be ons ced

my a Tae “ “|

_ bin, and that

; multilateral.

Bony jrutonl feck {i v od

oo

: a

t je pt rdirn
ves, Arey a wee “vt
Paks! 4G

ut ports hut @

‘5 Docld:32423505 Page 26 _-


--- Page 27 ---
I TOP SECRET
copy No, _ 5i} i

DRAFT RECORD OF ACTIONS
483rd NSC Meeting
(5/5/61) 7
1. U, S, POLICY TOWARD IRAN
Agreed that a Task Force should be established under the Assistant
Secretary of State for Near Eastern Affairs to prepare and circulate

@ report on the subject by May 15 for discussion by the Council on

May 19.

2. U, S. POLICY TOWARD KOREA

Agreed that a Task Force under the. Assistant Secretary of State for
Far Eastern Affairs should be established to prepare and circulate
a report on the subject by May 15 for discussion by the Council on
May 19,
3. U.S. POLICY TOWARD CUBA
(NSC Action No. 2413-c; Memo for NSC, same subject, dated May 4, 1961)
a. Agreed that U. S. policy toward Cuba should aim at the downfall
of Castro, and that since the measures agreed below are not

likely to achieve this end, the matter should be ‘reviewed at

intervals with a view to further action.

is
*

Agreed that the United States should not undertake military in-
tervention in Cuba now, but should do nothing that would fore-

close the possibility of military intervention in the future.

a TOP SECRET



--- Page 28 ---
ta

DRAFT! TOP SECRET

3. Ye-8. POLICY TOWARD CUBA (Continued) ..

fa.
.

ita)
4

in
°

Agreed that the United States should not impose a naval blockade
or attempt an air war against Cuba; it was noted that neither
course had the support of the Department of Defense or the Joint
Chiefs of Staff,

Noted the importance the President attaches to obtaining timely
and adequate intelligence as to Cuban military capabilities, es-

pecially the enhancement of such capabilities by Sino-Soviet Lice

‘military assistance, so that U. S. capabilities for possible in-

__ tervention may be maintained at an adequate level.

Noted the importance the President attaches to publication in the
Free World press of the terroristic actions of the Castro regiue,
and to possible political action to end the current terror,

Noted the President's direction that the Central Intelligence

Agency, with other departments, should make a detailed study of

_ possible weaknesses and vulnerabilities in the elements which

exert control in Cuba today,

Agreed that relations with the Revolutionary Council should be
improved and made more open, and while it cannot be recognized
as a government-in-exile, support should be given to it insofar

as it continues to represent: substantial Cuban sentiment,

‘Agreed that no separate Cuban military force should be organized

in the United States, but that Cuban nationals would be encouraged
to enlist in the U, S, armed forces under plans to be developed

by the Secretary of Defense,

“2.2. : TOP SECRET



--- Page 29 ---
3. U.S, POLICY TOWARD CUBA (Continued)

! i.

ix
‘°

if:

DRAFT | “TOP SECRET

i

Agreed that Cuban nationals now holding U. S, visitors' visas
will be given refugee status and assisted, under a program to
be developed and directed by, the Secretary of Health, Education

and Welfare, in carrying on|their former occupations, Refugees

now in Miami will be encouraged to locate in other areas, Cuban
nationals entering the United States will be given refugee’ status,
All refugees will be eligible to apply for travel privileges, and
it was understood that they would also be eligible for citizen-
ship.

Agreed not to impose an immediate trade. embargo on Cuba, “The
Secretary of State agreed to send to the President an analysis

of the effects of a U. S, embargo on trade vith Cuba in relation
to the Battle Act. It was agreed that when an embargo is im=-
posed, it should be as complete as possible, with certain excep~
tions for Canada and with Red Cross distribution of drugs.

Agreed that the United States should at once initiate negotiation
to enlarge the willingness Se other American states to join in
bilateral, multilateral and OAS arrangements against Castro,

such as (1) breaking diplomatic relations with Cuba; (2) control<-
ling subversive activities of Cuban agents; (3) preventing arms
shipments to Castro; (4) Limiting economic relations with Cuba;
(5) creating a Caribbean security force; (6) taitieting a naval
patrol to prevent Cuban {nvesion of other states in the Carib-
bean; and (7) denunciation of Castro as an agent of international

communism by all nations of| this hemisphere.

-3-) TOP SECRET

? Sahat
Page 29


--- Page 30 ---
3. U.S. POLICY TOWARD CUBA (Continued)

DRAFT. TOP SECRET

Agreed that the Alliance For Progress should be strengthened by
such measures as (1) rapid implementation of selected social de-
velopment projects; (2) acceleration of the implementation of
other Latin American aid; and (3) provision of additional re- -
sources for Latin American economic and social development, ins
cluding consideration of a supplemental appropriation for devel-
opment Loans of the order of $200-$400 million,

Agreed that the U. &. Informat ton Agency would expand its existe
ing program in Latin America, but not initiate electronic warfare
againet the Castro regime; means of propaganda should. be made
available to non-U. S. groups.

Agreed that U, S. military officers, under general guidance to
be prepared by the Department of State, would discuss the Castro

threat to all Latin America with Latin American officers.

Agreed that the Secretary of State should prepare a report on a
possible new juridical basis for effective anti-communist action,
Agreed thac pending appointment of an Assistant Secretary of
State for Latin American Affaire, the Task Force on Cuba should

be continued under the chairmanship of Richard N. Goodwin, Assis-
i

tant to the Special Counsel ‘to’ the President,

oho _ ; TOP SECRET



--- Page 31 ---
. ; / :
: so / DRAFT. OP SECRET

3 4, U, S. POLICY TOWARD THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC AND HAITI

Agreed that the Task Force i) ‘Cuba would prepare promptly both emer-

gency and long-range plans for anti-communist intervention in the

event of crises in Haitlh oF ithe Dominican Republic, Noted the

t the united States should not initiate the

ce eee eT

President! 8 view tha

overthrow of Trujillo before we knew what government would succeed .

him, and that any action against Trujillo should be multilateral.

5. Us Se POLICY TOWARD BRITISH cumana

at the “Task Force on Guba would consider what can be done

Agreed th

in cooperation with the British to forestall a communist take-over
i
“in that country. :
i
i

6. U, 8. POLICY IN MAINLAND SOUTHEAST ASTA

Noted that efforts soy be made to reassure Sarit and Diem

a.

that we are not “abandoning Southeast Asia.

, Noted-the president! 8 view that Sarit could be told that we are

S$, troops in SEATO forces to be sta~

is

considering inclusion | jot U.

tioned in Thailand, . the timing to be dependent on developments

during or after the gortheoming L4-nation Geneva Conference.

c, Noted that the Secretaries of State and Defense would be sending

recommendations to the President promptly on the number of U.S.

training: troops to be stationed in Thailand,

TOP SECRET


--- Page 32 ---
May 24, 1961

" qeyrme> MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION WITH:
a an . yy

Dick Bissell
Tracy Barnes

Mr. Bissell agreed that no major decisions concerning covert activities
., 4a Guba should be made before the President returns from his Européan
; trip. » ‘However there are a few things he thought should be done immediately:
' CRE
~ l. That he revise the internal CIA organization in preparation for possible
covert activities. This means changes bothehere and in Miami. —

Z. That a small group (30 to 40) Cuban! \pilots be continued as pilote under
commercial cover in Central Americal and perhaps one or two American
companies. No commitment should be, made to them that they would be
used in future activities, They would be trained as individuals and not |
“ag any group or "movement. This ig. primarily to keep their skills ©
alive and to keep them available. |

3. He wishes to clean up the Nicaraguan situation. We have left a lot of
- Military hardware there as a rasidue of the Cuban operation, He would
“"" “like to pull this equipment out of there, turning some of the B 26's over
‘to Somoza and allowing some of the Cuban pilota to remain there to train.
'Nicaraguans in flying these planes. This would be at Somoza's request
and would only be done if he insisted upon it as a re-payment-for services
rendered, I stressed that no Americans should be involved in the train-

ing of Nicaraguan pilots. . I,

4. He would Like to train a few Cubans jas radio operators, They would be
trained as individuals and would not know each other or that any others
were being trained. This amounts to training some individual agents for
possible future use. No commitments jwould be made to any of the men

trained. It is felt that this much activity is necessary in the next few weeks.

5. ‘In addition, the Agency would like to survey the various potential ineur-
__ vecttonary groups which now exist. There arg several of these groups,
- three or four of which claim to have an underground in Cuba. We should
: speak to them, We should tell them we could make absolutely no commite .
" ment_as to any future activities. However, he would Hike from them an ~ -
: assesment of what they thought they could do in the future and -- if they
“were to be active -- what help they would require from the United States.

TOP SEGRET



--- Page 33 ---
agen
oy

HW 50955 Docld: 32423505

' the Miami area and thet the groups wi
= in other citlea throughout the Southeastern part of the country.
. working in Miami was like trying ta casty on covert activities in the city

“' This would enable us to make a judgment as to whether we should en-
. gage in covert activity based partly upon this Information -= informa-

tion which would tell us what help in specific terms would be required

and what we could expect from these groups.

done in the case of Mirona Ray. The

This has already been
groupe contacted would include

thefCouncil, the MRP, UNIDAD and MRR.

6. In addition, he was informed that Swan radio could not be used bythe

‘USIA. They are unable to assimilate it into their system, I suggested

that we might try to find a good Latin ‘American group, e.g., The League

of Democratic Partics or the Institute
Figures, to use it. I said that for the:
not seem to me to be desirable,

xeports, I pointed out that the RIA age

lof Political Education run by Jose
Council to operate the station did

. 9. I discussed the general situation in ‘Miami and the various newspaper

ents now in Miami were known to

averyona, including the press, and were the same people who were

identified with pre-invasion activities,
tensified the rivalry among Cuban grow

i

discontent, I requested that this grow

Theis presence I felt only in-
ps and served as a focal point of |
p be broken up and that to the ex-

it

tent agents were necessary new people -- people not identified with the
pre-invesion activities -- should be sent to Miami.

8. It was agreed that no future covert

room of a newspaper.

lactivitios should be conducted in -

I said that

9. We also agreed that Dr. Miro could be informed that we were making
a survey of other Cuban groups but thet he should be. told nothing more.

apecific than that.

i

10, I also referred to the newspaper stories which reported that Batistianes

were belng used supported by U.S. -CiA funds.

-accurate. They said that this would b

They said this was not
6 very carefully looked into and that

the most specific instructions would be given that absolutely no Batistianos

should be supported directly or indire

ctly by the U.S. government.

Page 33

th whom we dealt should be scattered



--- Page 34 ---
af i. '
ee il
aa i
ror geen
-3-
* |

ll. I am strongly of the opinion that wa must clear up the Miami area
as soon as possible. Therefore, I willl get Ribicoff to expedite the
Refuges program, probably through the use of Mutual Security funds
-in order to get these people into jobs, Schools, etc. in other parts of
the country. Unless we do this we wre|going to have continually in-

i - - eveasing problema in the Miami area. .

Richard N. Goodwin

a

a

° H
;

iF

|

“ ~
i

i
i
i
|
i
TOP SECRET

“o. : om
evga / . i 7 ,

q
f
Hl
H



--- Page 35 ---
pelt pes Bai, THLE

how fubloperk sat Va tou,

ra blenca, Chb's wecwrd

nebe of ¢iaadegeing speretiona, the irbanphs of as bitolligeucs

CN

Ives BO, 10) -.

me NY

Apoepentgetion

|
hA Ra ana whe warked in OES daring te

daaered £9 & powiedia CLA conmuntsant in the yenre sine,

(wie pyrotaiiy bees very goo’, in the

ageney are unrnesne; gil the poblic Lesra abet (er abould bear
ahases? ary 18a Grver as Be, apals io tha meteco of the case, na
useney dodigsigd is alendagtine agtivity can aifowd eased few

wits tde agysiea.
jndguasot, ta thet the GEA, |

hm Aniperta thing be recogaiss tuday, bn my

ns et pracant wired asl qureltter ed,

aivowt owae we He quatn. itn roangin doy foture greory de syactioadty

TOM MHLBHIHE. loee rea
ip UY pobley, af hoena ag wi

CA ashacie will ohake dadus nencledyonyty
ei ae abroad. Aud, angi CUA ja vigloty

ysorpuniead, 4 weil tan ta Wad Algoriga lomtance) be sidaly Mamed for
dovalonwangs a which it ie whelly isracca rt,

i
the gxyguunand of thia
te thet aac eneiey with which

. wesstaswandum. in thet CLA's cresbla can te crear

in

»

Bhs ageoay keae Doon patmittind ta oy

ted tot tate pugtanamiyp fa fe te skheve main cayaunr Gh} aa boateowtte

coe hick of hye ndeaiins epe:

'

OO A ts ARN ee 1 AA EE EN

ie
wip hatya an eEpaat $on8 Ofel policy; 13} pa iradequaty

tsnap 8) oa nates scmwactlen

ed

tc 201 ne ES 8 oe HON hae oe ee meen

Uy shod be ~. @ game red wepanted GEA Galldne hoo bes btw

eceanional raatinets tot

 publielty., The Geaternngt Bis Ssh demetan cpavatts pal citar Gira

milvied by the Moot af on
tham loca, the axtlels
tiysserkeud Lebo af ue
$3, A285},

re om

tuncpinttonse ad Seooratie



--- Page 36 ---
CREL
a,
conception of the relnitonrhip betwsen cperstions am’ imellgencs,

Tha memoraadiany also cuggslate waye in which game cf these prob«
lems can perkeps be; ‘elloviated.
i
i

t
t

is c1A Autonomy: a

a

GIA condneta three mein for one af secret work; clantestios intelll-
gence colisction. covert political cperntinna; ond paramilitary
gebividies, It carrion, on those functidas with relative sutonorny. -
the resoons fer the autonen.7 are nistorical, ;

When OL4 began, the state Lenertinenty still thinking too niuch is
torma of ite traditionnl minetone in foreign affiaisa, osked on this
new vevture with auepicios and reununced the opportunity to seize
fires control of CIA operstions. It did not, fox example, try to
estebliah any affactive systeto cf clearance for CIA activities; and
sore ambarsaders frankly prefozred not to now what CIA waa upto
in thele countries. Aer 1953. the fect that the Seexetery of State and
the Director of Ceutral hutalligence were brothers further confirmed
CIA's indopendones froan ouperviston by Rate Depertment deeke.

_ Ia tha meastima, CLA grow th sise and power. Duying tha (iftiea it
bagan in seme arees te cubstrip the Etate Departrnent in the quality of
ite pereoncal. Partly because CIA paid higher ealaries and even
more parhaps bocaane Allen. Duilen gave hin peone courageous pro-
tacsticn agningt MeCasthyite | attacks, CLA eae able te attract and hold |

 g lerge number of able and lidopendent«colmded mon, The more it
. ated brilliant aetivicts te ita sta, the mera momextum ita operations
_ develeped, and the greater vale it played in the initiation cf policy.

By the ime that Btobe had begun to be fully averse of the problema
crested by an active end’ autonomous CIA, it bed leng since miaged

the chance to establish ita orm ultimate authority. While Stnte re.
tained a nominal suparvision aver covert political epsrations, this was,
te come degres off by ClASs tendency to pregent @ propesed operation
almost as a oe acecime lt: Stata never had title te central overt
clenfestine inteliigonse eeilection; and le hed lor? gronnd fa suc
t STORK BS OVETE ‘pulltieat ropesting and oven in the reimtonence ef
overt ‘diplomats contacts. ‘

t
at

ot



--- Page 37 ---
Yor ita part, CEA had developed a whole enrigs af functions poral-

- sling already exfieting functions of the State Department, and of

the Defease Departarvent as well. Today 12 bas its own political

desks and military staffs; i$ has tn effect ite own ferelga gorvice;

it kaa (or hoa bad) ite own combst forces; it even hae its oom alr
force, Re aroval budget is shout tines that of the Scate Depare-
mont, The contemporary CIA possaisos many of the characteristics -
“of @ state within a stata, J

ES Roetrina

Though C's antonemy developed for historical reaaens, it hae cose
able to endure becauga there ia ne coctyine governing aur conduct if
clanceating cperationa, Tha problom cf doctrive fer CIA ts the scent
to which iss varicus clamieatine misgions are corm:patikle with a free
and open anciety. :
Ik in idle to argue that beenuze the Communists tan do guch-and-much,
we are froe to do it tea. Communiara is a cread surtared in cone
epiracy! and the whels potne of Commnaunist social and political er gani-
zation la to make conepiracy effective, If fighting ire with fire’ means
contracting the freedoms traditionally enjoyed by Amertcase in ordar
to give more freadon to CIA, no one ssrigucly wishaa to do that. Yet
‘I do not feal that we have tried vigorously to think through the limiia
which the mgintennance of an open society places oa secret activity.
Unall thig ia done, CIA's role will not bo clearly defined and under-
steed, The prebdlem which must bo faced ia: what gort of sccret
activity is consistent with the preservation of 4 free gocial order? |

Woe rmuat begin, | beleve, by accepting She feet thee the United Srato9
will continue to be @ ngtteniin which politicians vill ack questions and
ronke epeeches, repoztera will dig out steries, newnpapere will pub.
lish editoriala, individuals,’ @rivea by promptings of conscience, will
blurt out Uiings harroful to the stale, aed eoon We de not wish te
change theses things and could net do ao crithvut violating the esacncs
ef oug society, Thess tainge rake up the framework in which CLA
must opersts, in chert, they conatitute the problem; ace, ag
Cenoral Marghall used to nay, "Thore'a no point in fighting the
problem, "



--- Page 38 ---
| _— 4.

sa rpc enmene erem t

atepitte sais ao na teed ton net cert whe the

nat is to carrans t3 here priscivlas aed

hack form of seernt activity hresente its own problem. Clandantine
iiwelligence collection bas heen a traditionnl function of the aatlonal
ents. Ite rules and usagse ere falrly welk estahliohed. In the
main, aepionege, M cecséueted with discretion, should prosant no e
- geaat problem. Hewever, whan conducted withan epen checkbook
aad a hroad srandste, aven espionage can begin te peab against tha
limite of eecrat activity in an.open aociaty, Icensider leter, for
eunropla, the gnsetion ef the Contretlsd Amarican Source (CAS) and
whether the overdaing of CAS ig not beginsing to harin other activitioa
of tho govarnmnent . -
Covert political operations pragont a trickler prahlem. Osengiens
ariss when it is necessary te.gubsidles newoprpers, politicians ard
organinations in ethar counts loo. But corruption cf the polities! Hfa
cf another notion is net a respenelbility to be lightly gecomad. 1
wonder whether CLA bea aot doxue teo much of thin for tho joy of i.
Parariliiary activition arcate on even more cificult problem, if
enly becauss the problems ef concenlinent are os moth more difficull.

In qanere], Lopeld euggsct that any secret oparation whess auccess is
dependent on the euporetsiiom.of nows, an lying te Cangrecemen end
joursalista and o2 the cecaption of the aleciorate chould be undertaken
only whon the orlata is se cpanidavable that the gains really senin to
catwaigh the dissdrantagee. | Thi suggests thet the sine af the pre-
posed eporatinn may be ef crusis’ linpertences. Sxsall emrations can
be done with a minimum ef agcompanying corruption. Tas greater
tre = vient ef the cneration, the more ite cuceass depends cn

warting tha impolece and denying the valuce of aa open secioty,
the sioking it becerses, and the mere urgent it ia that an over wheluilag
cane be neada for bea necausity.

|

in short, when confronted with A preopesad opergtian, Wa msst nat enly
ank whether tha opsration ie tachnisally fensitia in ita awn tarme; we
rust ask whether ito guccerd roqeiras our apen eoniesy te be In any
savinuwe way falao to it« awn principlon, ;

|
a

HW 50955 DoclId:32493505 Page 38 : 4


--- Page 39 ---
5.

ppathend ard omlicy

Clandestine activites abould 29 aenessed net eniy in the context
of theiy veleticnshly to an cpen sechuty Wat shes in tas eguzext of thalz
ralatianebip to United Suates feroign policy.

CLA speretions hava net been hala effeatively enukordinate to WU. 8.
foreign policy. | i .

Clandestine ingelligenee coltection 18s wy charter, {roa Grew
8 i, Thin fact anpotes American foreign policy
wee nomuliiteda of mbar ragainag when CIA fe Mecevarad gecruiting
egeate ox tt sping seurees in ® frinedly countrys The rece:
Singagots Soak, whan CRA, without notice to the Congul Genorel,

tried ta subvert & panimber of tha Spaciel Branck ef the Singapore
Police provided as tnotructiva evarcpla. Alter complications cf -
Wdicreus canglaxity. ineinding an attempt to subject the recruit to

2 Me-detector teat, tt tarned out that the recruit hed feng since
infermed bie suparicss ai the CIA appreach and wee leading CLA

imo atrep which, whts CpPrung. produced censitiesakie embarrass-
rest to relations botwacn tha US and the Glngagere government. —
There kevs been treetice of a comparable rari in Pakictaa and in
Jagan (where a group of Chineso Matianele wera emuggled into Saswbs
go wotk in & CLA-NOA apesation).

CIA has enid that, in gush enaas, neither the Emhogey ner the Dapari
ment in Washington is narmally informed of this type fh aperation.

th shost, m9 ong kmows how many potential pecbiams for UB foreiga
policy «+ ead hew much potential friction with inlendiy states +° are
being created G2 thia mamert by CLA elandostina teteliigernce eperedis.
Surely thera is on ax gumant fox permisting Siste te dtcliea whesher th
edventage to be goinest by the aparation (2. Go gha informuntios desiva’
fyars on agent witbl) the Epocint Drench of the Singapore Poltez) eut~
weighs the ries (6. Se emnenerating fhe lecal govoramert and shaking
tte confidence beta in our pucpeese aod fp cer gensah, Clandestine
intoklignnes oparations nhould plainly be clanzed roth with the Nagert
mort ff Sinte and (dave for enceptiocal inetacces ard cu agroamant 7
the Boeretary of State) with tha becal U.S. Ambnenedors



--- Page 40 ---
SECRET
6.

- 2. Covered galitient cprrestos toghnisslly veqaize Stats
Department clesranna, In pt actice, however, CLA haa often bean
able to ceiga the Initiative in ways which reduce State's role almost
to that ef a rubber stan.

This hag been partly the egaosquenca of tha sugesior drive aod
activien of CIA persennsl, aapactally ay comparal with tbe eisiidence

_of Gtate Depariment peregnnel, For cnample, whan men coms to CLA
with the angignment of developing covert political campaigna or ;
organizing ceupa or prepszing for payamilitery warfare, these men
naturelly fall to work with ingenvity and seal; thay prebably feel thar”
they are not carning theiz poy unlese, omy, they organize aa many
cougs 20 poauthle, | | ‘Yhe concept of ‘contingency pleaning’ has
Jepitimatized tid coucrate praparation ef cporstions till prasumahly
ta a hypothetical stage: people did net st firet aotles thes 'eantlngaucy
planning. ' when eagriad to tha stage of recruitment and tralaing of
porsconel, creates! vouted interest which cftea traaciorms contin~
geneies inte apparent escossities. Thes, if @ greep le assembled
and revved up on 5 continganty basis, then the failure to carvy tha
project through Ut io argasd) will invise the disappointment en?
alienation ef the grenpi Ge the preosure Inercaces to follow through
on what had etayted 23 3 pure epeculation. Thia wae a content factor,
of egarse, in the Cuban datioian -- ths fact that dighamiment of the
Cuban force in Guetemats Just soemed te cronts ten reamy probleme and
grmbargeoemante, herring chterad inte relations with porensalitieas in
foreign lamie, CLA hav pometlines eaomed te fark thot we must thare~
aftes do pretty much whs¢ they went ~- or eins thay will blew security
oF even go over to the Comrmunista, Thies epprosch bas mode us on
etcagien ths prisansys of oor, onrn agents. 9

2176 heeomns prigoners of cus agents in anether sense tee, Tho Cubsn |
apleode loaves the strong impression that CLA ts pot able te centrol ite
own lew-lovel oporazivas. While the CLA pengle in Washiogion ara man
ef euzeptigoaliy high quality, tho mon attracted to field jobs are some
times tough asd even viclocs progle motivated by drives ef their oun

and aw necessarily in pelittes’ or cran moral eyspethy with the norpoaes
of the oparstion. Such actions ag locking up tha Revolutiengay Counzil,
such enterpsises 2s Operation 40 in Miaml whera CIA egets copcrtacly
trained Cobonn in methods af tortura, ouch erisedss es the dotention and
third degree repertedly adrainictered to Dre Amiulin Nodal Tarsia aod

16 ether democratic Crbane thie Fekrussy -~ all (hies svegett that thinga
go om urier CLA sponoesetlp naith which CIA in Waghingten ta only otrwoly
acquainted. . a .



--- Page 41 ---
1
7
PO RECRET
i
A

i bas meant too that tha Stata Depertment, oites epprissd cf an

opevatien only in its loter atagon, is under great preacure te
endorse the cporgetion a4 elready mountsd tesaues of the alleged

evil consequences of onerciatus 2 vole, [well remember Tom

iMann’s remerk the day the decizion wae mide te go shend on Cuba:

"lL would nevar have favored loltiattag this cperation: bet, aince it

ag gone aa far as it has, 1 do not think wa ¢an wick calling i4 off."

Moreover, nia tims when there fa increasing premium en activism,

Siete, whan it quastiens CIA coaretions oF initintives, caste Hoalf in

apriesy, sisay, asgaiive rele. The advocate of clandestine activities .

seers ‘tough’ and ceshiatics the appoeosat hes te invoke such istenaiblos

63 the reputation ef the United States, world publle epinion, "What

do wa gay in the Unital Motions?", ete., art gore bopelessly

idealletic, lagalistie and ‘acdt. *

The vreoult of ClA's inftiotive in cavert polities! enerations has boon

te craste situations which have forced pelicy on the Stato Departmont.

Thia wae not the ortainal idee behind CIA, As Allen Dullss wrese

in hie 1947 memorandurn to the Sonata Armed Servises Coammitice,

"The Central Intelligentea Agency showd hove aothing to do with policy.”

Yat, in tha yeare eince, CLA has, in effect, ‘nade’ pelicy in many

parte of the world, A numbar of gowarnments etill in power know

that they have even been tarenia of CLA attempta ot averthroy + net

8 State of mind celeuleted to etimulate frieadly feelings toward the

United States, Indpaeuta, ef cuares, isa prime Oxample, —

Thia experience ax sgecat 4 thet the pressat syetsin by which CLA notifies |
State of a prolected covart operation te inadequate to protect US
trtereate, There mingt be some meant by which Siete can be infozmod
ef euch coernations at an early enough etaga to affect the conception

and preilminary planning ef the eperetinn, Ctborwise CIA will con-
tinve to confront Meta with Propositions having psteatial limpnet on
foreign policy but st too late | a point to subject that lmpect to reascne
alle contre.

+ The e Contre} ed 3 American Soures (CAB) ropreesnia a particuing
aspect. of CIA's eneseachmast on policy -emeking fanctioss. CIA taday
bag nearly a3 many pe apie under official eavsr evarsene ap Stzte ~~
3900 to 3706, Abont £500 of these are uadoy Etata Department cover

4

|
I
|
|

Sect 7
Ge ashe


--- Page 42 ---
8,

(the other 2200 are ptemmnbiy ander military ¢ or other neneftats
oilicial cover), Gripinally the uge of Sante Departmant cover for -
CIA pernonnal was supposed to be etrtetly limited and temporary.
Tt loullen-Correr-Jinckeon repost stated in 1943, “Ths CIA should
nat use Hiete Repayment cover #9 @ eimple answer te all tte problenid,
bet ghould procsed to develop he own outside cuwver and evertuslly in
this way and through increaead efficiency of Ita overceaa personnel,
find 9 way ta temper its denseuda ypon the Sints Lapartmens,” dene
theless CLA haa sxenrilly nereasod ite requisitiane for editetal cover.
There arn geveral rcagona why CLA bas abandoned its original tateniior
of develocing sytiers cf private caver, it la easter bo arrange Covet
Rovourn Sivia; itis dese axpensive; tt ia quicker; if facilitates tis.
sucurity 2f operations aa well na of corainunteationa; | insuree &
pleasanter ie foes the CIA poopie, But the affect is te further the
CLA ancroathmant oa the traditional functions af State.

In serne miesicas, Ilusderstand, CAS peroeonnel cutaumbers reguisr
Stace Department perzonnal, [a the American Zibagary in ¥ienna,

out of 20 persons iivied in the Octobvar 19460 Faretgn Service List es.
being in the Polittees Section, 16 are CAS paraonnsh) of the 3) cfficers .
Mated gn engaging in raporting activities, ever half are CAS, Ui tha
13 offictre listed in the Pelitien] Saction in cur Embaasy in Chile,
liera CAB, Gn tha dey cé Proeident Kennedy's Inauguration 4? percant

ef the pelitical sfficors aarving in United States Embaasiog ware CAG

Samaetimes the CI rciseicn shief has been ia the country longer, has
more tnonoy at his disposal, wields more influseee (emi ts abler) than
the Ambeseador. Clten be has diract access to the local Prime
Mintster. Sometiniss fas during a critical period ta Leong) he purausa
a difierent polley frora that of the Ambassador, Algo bs is gare yaily
well known lecally as tha CL, ropresertatives ,

|

Jn the Paria munssy todays, ‘there are 128 CLA peogle, CLA in Parise

_hne long gince bagun ta mown izto axenn cf polities] reposting sersvally
eccepied by State, |The CLA men doing avert internal political reperting —

eutnumber theae in the Embagoy's galitical section by 10-2. CLA haa

even Bought to monepeliza eontact with cextaia French polliical personalt-
tes, among thera the Prasident ef tha Natioug] Agecrstly, CLA eceuples © -
the top Nooz of the Paria Reqhasoys @ feat woll known locally; | and ca



--- Page 43 ---
4 3.

the night of the Goaeroly' revenlt la Algeria, possesoaby noted
uth amugement that the top fleer was atlane with Mabie. {Lam
infewmed thet Ambagendes Cavin was oble to sseure extranse that
night te the CIA offices only with éaffleulty.}

CLA le agparently nov tivusly crministed to tha CAG aporeseh an a
pormanom solution for ite problems. Role presging ta have CLA
people given tha ark of Cesnselar, Belere Stata lesne contred of
moze aul more of its pragumed ovrergzss perecanel, amd befsse CAS
hoegnws parcmanvolly inte gvated inte the Forsigs &orvics, if would oa
gaam impertans (ad to Resure ovary ambaorador the firm conteed
aver the Jonnl CAS stetlon naminstly promigcd in the N&O Directive

of dantary 19,1964, and iu)! te seview the current CAS alguation with
&n ya toa steady rocuetion ef CAS personnal,

4, Favamilitary warfare, I gather, te regerded ta sama quarters
aa a purely technic menor, easily detachable fram policy aod there.
fora & proper function of the ‘Department of Dafense, Yot there ia
almest ao CIA fonction mead pecullazly dependant oa the political
context than paramillincy warlors.

Vhere age aqvoaral raazong See this. For ena thing, a pasamilitacy
opovetion is lo ita nstura 3 lasgs end atzinetetle epsretion and thareby,
ag suggested abova, | claskes|aith the preaupresitions of eur epen —
sockety., (Thea considerations naad not sepiy, heweves, to the

training of, say, the Zauth Vistoamene in guorrilla tection er ts the

curport of elrasdy ozigting quermihs activitses,} Fer sucdther, Vi
moral and politierd ¢ Fe ice of direst peremilitery failure is acute far
va, Communtate, whan they stimulate paramilitary activity, ova
daing what the world oucrcts|fvem them; when we de i, wa aopaar
to hetray eur cwn profeesed principles and thtrefare canecs allazd to
soropoand delinquency by detaat % hioreover, ef tae reqent Alseriag
apligeda chewed, onde wa eonvinca tha werld that we exe emmnanitiad te a
paramilltary sndeever, wp Will be blamed foe o22 eorie ef things, And,
ns the recent tractorafar-priecuera egisede ehiwad, whia wa do sand
man to poasihie foath, we we eannut Lightly welts therm off and clare the
booka, Ths Camrnintote, on the other haw, have no sormlae akwat
Hants sing @ losing ¢ pieare



--- Page 44 ---
SLCREL 1D.

hisregver, puarsiia wastare is fought, much mere than mililary
mtn ordicarily realise, ta ex bivologleal context, Ths gnexrilia
suceacde when hie pregram onlists qracerevts supparts and i is
very Gifiealt indeed to best him when the courtryaide io with dim.
Yaa Mook told Canara Maretell in 1946. act to werry ebost the
worrilian in Indoneving “we are sending 50, O80 man ont there
and PAM clean the ofteation ui in the threa momthe." Meshal,
. whe bad had amparigscs iighting gquerrifias in the Philippiase,
weplied, “In won't Lees exsy. You will fied thet thay will bleed
you to death." Cppzua and Algeria Wlustrate the éiifertty. of aver-
egining guerrilla recistanca throsgh cheer wolghs ef military force.

*

Sarioue guerrilla movements! ‘hava bean defeated ealy threo times cinca
the end of the Second World ‘ ars in Greece, bacaues Tite's defection
closed the northern tories in the Philipeiness maditn Maleya, In.
tho last two case the gueryitla sosisiance ended borause cf tar
combination cf political aot military couatormeneures, | The ot otrungle
in Malaya, ae Fteid Mag @hal wi (Tampler underetocn | tod said), was for.
the miods and heasta ef the people: it tharefers involved not cely
paramilitary operations bul 2 vast educational progvamy esgoaisation
of trade ualons, poliiiest reform sod en offar of national independence,
if the guerrillas powsy lies in bie revelutiocary pregram, te gnewer
lies in past in menting ths neade which anatie the guerzilia te rowse
the esuutryeiae. OW fhe ut a political geal," wrate Mao Testing,
“guorrilla warfare niast fail, ea it must U ite political ebjectives co
not evincida with the napixaticns cf ths prepio awl if their aympathy,
eceoperation esd aesistiocs cannes bs gained." He added, "Po wa
wart the suppor’ of tha masses? Twado, ws awl ga among the
TaeHs003 areucs ther te activity; cencern oureelves with thois weed
amd wee." | | ; |
: Far thoes rersons, panemilttery yarfnce cannot te conaiiered ag .
‘ primesQy a milltary wespons Rilo primary & parities, wanpen end a

rouet therefore be sub} ected ta clove and eareiul petities! crepaight. _

ig prebably should be retained in o recesatitidad CIA rather thao

‘ qranefarred to Dafenza. | =

{
{

'
i
i
i
|
H i
i
1
5

ra

- Page 44


--- Page 45 ---
5. How to station Fellcy Cantrel? Mera l wonder whether tha
British experignes “alght nat be of valuo. The netehle fozture cf the -
British intelligence syesem ia the dotermiration to keep clandagtine
activity under otrist Foreign Uéiles eontral. This contrel io achieved '
ig a sumber of waye!. -

&) Seorat Intelligance Service (MI-4) itself operntes unter
the dlreation of the Joint inteMigence Cemumiites, which has a
Foreign Office chairmin (uptil recently Siy Pierich Dean, who .
is now tha Britich representative et the UN) asd which iaclwice :
the Service Inteliicence dircctera end representatives of the :
Celenial Offices and the Commonwealth Relations Offise ae well
as the Chief of S15.

&) bnale political warfare directives are originated, net
by 35, bet by tha infermation Rasverch Department in the
Foreign Offles, often in consultation with an interdepertmental
Working Group oo fsternaticanl Comrmemiet Fronts, and anlar
the ultimate centro] of the Superinteading Undar-flecretary of
: tho Permanont Under-Secretary’ F) Department t& the Fareign
no , , Chéhihee.

e) SIS eavert pelithenl action campatyaa ent net ently cone
form to Foreign Cities dizestives buat mvaat ba cleared with the
eppropziate Fereigm Office grogrerkical cenkus

Po : : - @) warking groups under IRD cheismanship gureva operas
tlone in epacisl arcea, soch ea, for example, Gino-Buviat rala-
tone ov the Wexid Youth Featival, ,

e) a Doreign Céflca Stall Listeen Officer eite naw to the 818
Chief, and Feraign Office * officiate oorve tare ef duty ba SB
aecticns,

All thees devices might ba adapted for use by tha State Regartncet.
Organinetionally, this would mote bag the intalligenes sgansy weaid
retain eperstional asiaraasy but thas ite oreretions weold bs af atk
paints eubjncs te Rete Departos ut clenract? = M elenrencs te be

“BT were oe .

HW 50955 BDoclId: 32423505 Page 45


--- Page 46 ---
ce

| enforced by dizestives, by Seate Department chalsmenehip of -
working groupe, amd by the infiltration «f Steso Degarimant

personnes ints the intalligance agzacy.

Otrrtously thie ostenp would net succeed, hawever, waloaa the
Stato Dapartment Bavlf ware pregsred te overcome 9 inbred
hebite cf diffusion, negwitviem ned delay anf to take a firm 3 ant
purpoesiul grip onthe Siiuction, .

TV. Gperationa and Intelligonce

Tha gelationship between eparzticna and intelligence ralees particu.

‘lasly perplexing quemtionn,  ‘Ingsligense’ includes two separable

activities: clonéeatios collections; and seacerch, analysta and
oralvation, The Uvet decie aith that amezll portion ef raw intelil-
gones procared by ezeret moang (Mz. Dullea estimated in 1947 that
"a proper analysio ef the inteligaace obtainable by. . . overt, ;
nermal, and shevebcrnd means wenid supply us with ever 66 percent,
{ ehould estimate, of tha information requrad for the guidance ef our
netiqnkl policy"}; ¢ks aecand inveives the collenea and inturprotatica

_ of all forme of intelligeaca, however obmined sad the production of

ogtimates.

Under the Britteh system, elandestine collection fe entrusted to tho
Sserat intelligence Ssrvice, The resserah, enaiyets and estiresting |
fenctten te loceted iy the Foreign Offices Research Department.

Under the Ancorican eysiom, CLA hae sreaponsthibisy Lor both

clacectina collection aud rescerch and asalysin, The Stata Depart-

mert's Duronu of Inteliigenta and Reezarch oles hes reascereh ond ;
analysis raeponsibilities; bx, im practice, GIA has eaiahiiched ;
contrel over the rachiaesy fox prodocivg nafieoel entimetse la auch ;
& why ac to reduce State'a contribution te aubraittieg ie views te CIA

iuy ecceptance or rejection, in cthar words, where in Grow Britain

the Foreign Offica playa the ecordinating rete im the lateliigence field,

in the United States thnt sols Aso boon aesusmad by CLA.



--- Page 47 ---
13.
| |
The argument againat incorporating the research an& estirante
function in State wos made by Dulles in 1947: "For the proper --
judging cf the sitaation in ray foreign country ft i¢ important that
information should bs processed by en agency whose duty it {9 to

weigh facts, and to draw conclusicas fram those fngta, without

having either the facta or the conclusions warged by the inevitable.

and oven propor projudices of the mon wheoa duty it ie te dotermine
policy and whe, having once determined a pelicy, are too likely to

be blind to azy facts which might tend te prove the policy to be

faulty." ; *

Precisely the came argumat cen bs used with equal effect against
thea incorporstion of the research end eatimrte function in CIA -- |
i.e., if intelligescs fa teo clegely connected with operations, then
thone committed te a particular cperetion will tend te select out the
intelligence which validates the oparation.

Obviously beth argaments conclude In a case for the eatablishment of
@ fairly independent research and satimate grow. But, if the Rib
group ie tco independert, one runs inte the opposite danger: thet ia,

that neither policy nor cperadions will be subjected te adequate -

intelligence checks. :

The trcudle with the Cuben eperation, for example, was not thet
intelligence and operations were combined, bat preciasly that the
Cuban operation eveded systematic inteliigents jadgment. The in-
ealligence branch (DD) of CIA was asver informed af the extetenca

ef the Cuban oparation, The Office of Natienzl Estimates vas never
acked te comment on the aggusnption, fer exemple, thet discauient
bed reached the point in Cuba where a cuccesstul landing cpermtion
would preveke uprisings behind the lines and defestians fzroen tha ;
Milith, Ia December end Febroscy, the Céfics of Nationnl Estimates
produced general oprraisale ef the Cuhan pituation, but theese wore
whotly independent of the Cuban eparation, I gnahog thet, tf tte
epinica had been invited, DDI would have given quite a diffezont
eotimete of the state of epinien in Cuba from that oa which the cpera-
tlon was baeed, There exiztod, in short, the ridtculers situation

Me jel
Page 47


--- Page 48 ---
| SECREL

14,

thes hnowlodge ofthe Cuban uperation, Aeuated ts Miarnl bara

by any number af low-level agents in the operations byanch ef CIA, = -
wae denied to evon the top dficinis of the intelligeacs branch, Tho
Dureau of Intelligence and Research of the Department of State

know oven leas about the Cuban eperation.

Ths problem, then, is to have an R&E greug guffleiestiy indepeadent
wi both policy and operations to resist the pressure to make the cane
foe veoted Idege arth interests -- yet sufficiently cles to be abio to .
subject projected operations or pelicies to thea moet imteage and
gaarching acrutiny.

Where could this group va located? U the CIA were te became.
subordinate to State, ag MI-6 is to the Forelgn Offies, then the Khe
function might be vested in 8 cosrdinate esbagency, semewhat inds-
pendent of both State and GLA, yet closely caaneeted with beth in day-
te-dny operations. The R&E suhagency weald recetve intelligence
frown CIA and from Siste, as well ac frern the services and, of course,
from public saurcea, i would repreesnt, in edfast, a fusion ed CLA/DDI
and State/Intelligonce and Reeesrch. HB might sles take over certain

. ef the eervice fuactions new confided to CLA «- photegraphic interpre-
tatlen, blegraphical date, foreign browdeast monitoring, overt cellec.
tei, maps, ete. There might be in addition o Joint Intelligence Board.
with representatives fram al} the intelligence agencies and with o
“State Department or White House chairman.

Vv. " Consteston.

The argument of this mernsrendum implies @ fetriy dvastle rearrange.
mart of cur pragent inteliigance ast-up. f aleo im@lies the capacity
ef the State Department te aceume commend of the situation and to do
oo in an effective and parpasclul way, Uf the State Department ee at
present staffed ia not expebdle of assuming effective commend, this ie
not, jn my judgment, an argument against o rational reorganization of |
intelligence, It (9 an srqacnong fer a dragtic overhaul of the Erte ©
Department. a



--- Page 49 ---
EORLL

HB

The structure wieh would met the crites(® suggested in this

memorandum would be ae follows

1) The Sete Departmen: weeld be granted genaral
‘elogvonce suthority over all clausecgtine activity. This
night be effectuated on the Britigh model by the aggciatiment
. 8 e Deputy Undersecretary of State for bdolligence, whe
would act for tha Cocretary in theer matters and whe right
- gorve as chairmen of a Faint imatligonca Beard, .
2) The Joint Intelligence Baard woul inclads roprae
sentatives from all elements in the intelligence community
end alge from the White Rouse.

3) The operating brenchas of the pregent CIA werald be
reconstituted undér some bMameless titie (the Nations! Informa.
tion Service}, This new agency waeld be charged with recponale
bility far clandestine ccliection, for covert solf(tical operations
and fer paramilitary activities, It wood svbmdt projects to the
Deputy Undersecretary of Nate for intelligence fer clearance.

In general, the agency would bear somevhst the same relations
ship to State ae thy Disarmament Administration and ICA —
presently da,

4) A second semicindapendent agency would be cet up, ages:
bearing a blamelesa tithe (the Forvign Nesearch Ageacy), ceordie
nate with the operations agency. Thia agency would be charged
with reapanetbility for collation and iterpretation, & wavid
includs CLA/DIM, the Bureau of Intelligance ead Regearch tn
State, and the vayleua service functions new carried on by CLA
(photographic intezpratatian, biographical files, fereign broadcast
monitoring, ecientific & intelligence, MLS, avert edilection,. cic, },
it might well be located thn the CLA building in MeLann,

Arthur Cehlesingos, jr.
ect The Attarney General ;
Mr, Bundy
Mr. Dungan

ee

ae
nw 5098S Do

eld:32493505 “page 49


--- Page 50 ---
SECRET . bee

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

July 8, 1961

MEMORANDUM FOR MR. RICHARD GOODWIN .

SUBJECT: Cuban Covert Plan

Analysis of this plan shows that it envisages (a) ''an island-wide
resistance organization responsive to Agency direction"; "internal
assets under close Agency control and direction"; (b) 'support and
guidance to those anti-Castro groups who are revealed to have a
potential for clandestine operations"; and (c) "primary operations
bases'' inthe US. In short, what is intended is a CIA underground
formed on criteria of operational convenience rather than a Cuban
underground formed on criteria of building political strength sufficient
to overthrow Castro.
Despite the pretense of political impartiality, the effect of these CLA
specifications is obviously to favor those groups most willing to accept
CIA identification and control, and to discriminate against those groups
most eager to control their own operations. JI.e., the plan discrimi-
nates in favor of mercenaries, reactionaries, etc., and discriminates
against men of independence and principle. Thus these criteria elimi-
nate the Manuel Ray group; yet I ¢an find nowhere in the documents
any explicit exclusion of pro-Batista people.

Leaving aside the moral merits of this discrimination, the practical
effect is to invest our resources in-the people least capable of generating
broad support within Cuba. The Agency fails to confront the key prob-
lem: i.e., that those most capable of rallying popular support against
the Castro regime are going to be more independent, more principled
and perhaps even more radical than the compliant and manageable

types which CIA would prefer for operational purposes.

My recommendation is that you stop this paper in its present form and
demand that it be recast to make political sense, The key is the

SECRET.

>
f



--- Page 51 ---
UNA See re
eld: 32423

SECRET —

2.

statement that our covert activity "should be viewed only as the -
covert contribution to any national program designed to. bring

about the eventual replacement of the Castro government."' This

is correct; and there follows from it (a) that our covert activity |
should encourage the spread of the political sentiments within Cuba :
most likely to rally support for Castro's overthrow (which means, for
example, Ray rather than Batista), and (b) that our covert activity
should harmonize with our basic national policy of rescuing the Cuban
Revolution, as set forth in the White Paper. .

It is a fallacy to suppose that clandestine activity can be carried out
in a political vacuum.

ALN

Arthur Schlesinger, jr.

“SECRET :

SES


--- Page 52 ---
September h, 1962 oo, u

She ap tee

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

‘yy The Guban Task Force met at the White House on Thursday, August 31.
“ ‘Deeaent were Under Secretary Ball, Assistant Secretary Woodward, two
. members of the ARA Bureau, Dick Bissell, Tracy Barnes and myself, ~.

a “The following decisions were made:

1, We would proceed immediately to discuss with other Carribean govern-
ments the possibility of organizing a Carribean Security Force. This could
be organized on the basis of informal understandings within the framework
of existing treaty arrangements, ag a geries of new bilateral treaties, or a
- formal, multilateral treaty. It was thought that the basis of organization

oun, WOuld depend on the judgment of other Carribean countries as to how they

:": squid accomplish the objective of establishing the force without running ~°
serioua internal political riska, The United States, for ita part, would pre-
fer the formal multi-lateral arrangement. Such a Carribean Security Force
would have at least four major aspects:

(1) Advance committment to come to the aid of other signatories

... threatened by Castro revolutions and, perhaps the designation -
of specific units for participation in neceesary multi-lateral
actiona, . i

(2) The establishment of a pool of intelligence information con- ood
cerning subversive activities with provision for exchange of Pais
such information, ; _ : .

(3) The establishment of a Carribean air and sea patrol to watch.
for suspected infiltration of Castro arms or agents, t,

@)A training program in combatting subversive tactics, police
organization and procedure, etc. ;

ue It was conceded that the substantive aapecta of this arrangement could, if: _ ;
+, necessary, be achieved informally. However, the decision to seck a more .
.... formal arrangement was primarily arrived at on the basis of interasl political

‘. ‘gonsiderations in the United States.

m SECRET
Vive
HWOS0935.. Doel: 32423505*. Baye 52



--- Page 53 ---
“4

2. It was decided that our public posture toward Cuba shouldibe as quiet as

possible -- trying to ignore Castro and his island,

»3, Our covert activities would now be directed toward the destruction of
” targets important to the economy, ¢.g., refineries, plants using U.S. equip-

_ ment, etc. This would be done within the general framework of covert opera-

tions -- which is based on the principle that para-military activities ought to

“ _. be carried out through Cuban revolutionary groups which have a potential for

"establishing an effective political opposition to Castro within Cuba. Within

-, that principle we will do all we can to identify and suggest targeta whose des-
a truction will have the maximum economic impact. .

“4 We will intensify our surveillance of Cuban trade with other countries and

- especially U, S. subsidiaries in other countries; and then employ informal
‘mathods to attempt smdlivert this trade -- depriving Cuba of markets and

’ sources of supply. I understand that we have already h had a few successes in
 thia effort.

5. We will establish next week -- in the State. Department -- a psychological

“warfare group, This will be a full-time group of three or four people charged

with the responsibility of assembling all available information on the Sovietiza-

‘ tion of Cuba, repression of human rights, failure of the Cuban economy, etc. -

ae

ae

-- much of which has been hitherto classified -- putting this information into

.. readable, popularized form, and developing, methods of disseminating it through

Latin America. Such dissemination wouldte primarily through USIA channels

“2 but would include feeding it to Latin papers for "exclusive" stories, . helping to .

: yo PTepare scripts for Latin American broadcasts, perhaps a direct mailing list
. of intellectuals and government officials to be handled by a front group, etc,

’ The basic idea is to get this stuff into channels of Latin American communica-

tion, instead of treating it as official U. S, Propaganda. We have selected

‘gomeone to head this effort -- Jim O'Donnell of George Ball's office who was -

a free-lance magazine writer (including work for the Saturday. Evening Post)
for many years and who Ball highly recommends,

6, The CIA was asked to come up -- within ‘the week -- with a! ‘precise, covert
procedure for continuing the below-ground dialogue with the Cuban government,
The object of thia dialogue -- to explore the possibility of a split within the
governmental hierarchy of Cuba and to encourage such a split -- was fully de-

. tailed in my last memorandum to you, This is an effort to fin& an operational.

_ _, technique.

|
Richard N. Goodwin

 SECRET-



--- Page 54 ---
HW 40955 Docla:32423505 #ige."i4

EYES ONLY FOR THE PRESIDENT

November 1, 1961
MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT:

I believe that the concept of a "command operation" for Guba, asdiiscussed
with you by the Attorney General, is the only effective way to handle an all-
out attack on the Cuban problem, Since I understand you are favorably dis-
posed toward the idea I will not discuss why the present disorganized and
uncoordinated operation cannot de the job effectively.

The beauty of such an operation over the next few months is that we cannot
lose, If the best happens we will unseat Castro. Lf not, then at lease we will
emerge with a stronger underground, better propaganda and a far clearer
idea of the dimensions of the problems which affect US.

The question then is who should head this operation, I know of no one current-
ly in Cuban affaire at the State Department whe can do it, Nor is it a very

_ good idea to get the State Department involved in depth in such covert activi-

ties, Ido not think it should be centered in the CIA. Even if the CLA can find
someone of sufficient force and stature, one of the major problems will be to
revamp CLA operations and thinking «- and this will be very hard to de from
the inside.

I believe that the Attorney General would be the most effective commander of _
such an operation. Either lor someone else should be assigned to him as
Deputy for thie activity, since he obviously will not be able te devote full time

‘to it. The one danger here is that he might become too closely identified with

what might not be a successful operation. Indeed, chances of: success are very
speculative, Timre are a few answers to this: ;
(1) Everyone knowledgeable in these affaira -- in and out of govern-
ment «- is aware that the United States ie already helping the underground.
The precise manner of aid may be unknown but the fact of aid is common
knowledge. We will be blamed for not winning Cuba back whether or not we
have a "command operation" and whether or not the Attorney General heads it,

EYES ONLY FOR THE PRESIDENT

@OP SECRET



--- Page 55 ---
EYES ONLY FOR THE PRESIDENT

-2-

; .{2) His role should be told to only a few people at the very top
with most of the contact work in carrying out his decisions being left to his
deputy. If that deputy is someone already closely identified with the conduct |
of Cuban affairs then it would appear as if normal channels are being followed
except that decisive attention would be given to the decisions which came
through those channels. There are probably three or four people whe could
fulfill this criterion, 7 ;

This still leaves a substantial danger of, identifying the Attorney General as
the fellow in charge, This danger must'be weighed against the increased _
effectiveness of an operation under hia command.

Richard N. Goodwin

a tE

EYES ONLY FRR THE PRESIDENT NS

| TOP SECRET

@

ee oe

MW 50955 Docid:32423505 ‘Page 55


--- Page 56 ---
5

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

EYES ONLY FOR THE PRESIDENT AND THE ATTORNEY GENERAL

2 November 1961

MEMORANDUM

I believe that the operation should be organized with five staff components: ;
l, Intelligence collection and evaluation ,
2, Guerilla and underground :
3, Propaganda ; :
4, Economic warfare (exclusive of covert activities within Cuba)
5, Diplomatic relations :

Bach of these divisions would be headed by someone directly responsible to
you. In addition you would have 4 deputy who would do the actual contact work
between this operation and the various government agencies involved, He

would be the one identified as the source of orders and directives when direct

a exempt

contact with the agencies was needed. pire brknammmaseletin ae ae

aaa He should be from CIA for reasons discussed belowe 1

would act as Staff Assistant to yous My primary job would be to see that
current questions for decision were presented to youat your morning staff
meetings. with the alternatives fully discussed. 1 would have no direct opera-
tional duties; thus keeping in the pack, grounds : .

J have talked to MacNamara and he has promis ed to supply 2 topflight guerilla
and underground man, as well as’ whatever additional. personnel we need. I
think this is the best way to handle it. However, it will be necessary to use
the CLA apparatus and agents for this. That is why it will be valuable to assign
a CLA man to you as deputy in order to keep them happy and

yee deeply involved at the command tevel. In this way we can probably
avoid an internal struggle between the CIA field operatives and the Defense

command,

Both the diplomatic relations and economic warfare people can come from
State. Ihave some ideas on this and -- if you give the signal -- will discuss
it with George Ball. ‘ .

EYES ONLY FOR THE PRESIDENT AND THE ATTORNEY GENERAL

TOP SECRET

BW 50955 DocId: 32423505

Page 56

i
;
\
i


--- Page 57 ---
4 , re

TOP SECRET

EYES ONLY FOR THE PRESIDENT AND THE ATTORNEY GENERAL

~2- .

One of Bob Amory's brightest young men should be assigned to intelligence :

collection and evaluation. _
i ; _

As for propaganda, J thought we might ask Tad Szule to take a leave of absence
from the Times.and work on this one =~ although we should check with Ed
Murrow and Dick Bissell. t :

These people should have a headquarters. It should probably be at the Pentagon 7
because (a) we might get better security; (b) MacNamara will be easier to work:
with in terms of getting whatever staff services, secretarial personnel, etc;

{c) Itis a relatively neutral place between State and CIA; (d) you could re~
_axrange your schedule to stop in on the way to Justice every morning ~~ :

perhaps for a breakfast or post-breakfast meetings

This operation should not be discus sed ‘at tomorrow's meeting. Initially only”
George Ball (and Rusk, of course), MacNamara, McCone and Bissell should
know of your participation. When they are named, the five section heads

—
will have to know =~ tie the initial organizing work and contact work should |

\

i}

be done through ‘your Deputy and myself. If this subject is discussed tomorrow
then already too many people will know about it. ;

“The first steps are (a) name the section chiefs (b) review with them all current

operations in their field, establish their authority over operations, get nec~

essary staff assistance (on as small as possible basis), and start them to race
work; (c) establish the physical headquarters; (ad) arrange for financing -~" co
presumably coming largely from CIA.’ :
If this meets with your approval 1 will begin work on the above jtems with all :
final decisions on per sonnel and other, matters subject, of course, to your 7
approval. . : : \ :
|
rf |
. ‘ I
: Richard N. Goodwin | |
i
‘E a

‘

BYES ONLY FOR THE PRESIDENT AND THE ATTORNEY GENERAL :

SECRET

HW 50955 Dotld:32429505...Bage57-°


--- Page 58 ---
EYES ONLY
ie - November 4, 196)

The following are some tentative recommendations meant te serve as &
baais of discussion:

I would recommend that the Cuban operation be organized in
five components:
wo . t t- 7
_ a. Intelligence collection and evaluation
aan b. Underground and guerilla
, c Propaganda ;
d, Economic warfare (other than covert activities
felthin Cuba) ; :
e. Diglomatic relations |

Although theae sections will make use of available agency cazabilities the
_. Sperationgl authority for each of these aspects of the operation will be in
* "> the hands of the section lender who ia responsible to the chairman ofthe
group. Alt of theae activities will be compartmentalized aa much as posaible,
S.e., only the chairman will be kept completely laforemed on all aspects of .

the operation.

_ ‘The operation should have ite physical headquarters in the Department of
ls Defense, both for maximum security and to detach it ee much as possible
” from identification as a CLA activity, | . ‘ mo
The first steps sre:
. 1. Designation of section chiefs; :
2 A complete survey by each section chief of current
operations in hia field;
3. The establishment of control over operations by the
section chief; = = ,
4. The expansion of operations where feaoible.

Bob Amory should be asked to designate one of hie best men to centralize
the intelligence collectiea and evaluation. ;

| -sPRe Defense Department should designate the section chicf for underground
*. and guerilis activities. ft os 7

a - - EXES ONLY -
TOP SECRET

4



--- Page 59 ---
EYES ONLY
«2=

et eny WO should discuss expansion of propaganda operations with Ed Murrow |
SET" and appropriate CLA officers -- not relating it to stepped wp operations

in other fields. With these people we ghould sclect a single poraon te be

the propaganda chief, coordinating CLA and USIA operations. Ihave

suggested that Tad Ssule <= if he can be persuaded to take a leave of ab-

sence ~- would be a useful person to advise on this aspect of the operation.

~- Both economic warfare and diplomatic relations should be handled bya’ ,
a designee of the State Department. It is important to keep the diplomatic —
: gelations aspect of this operation under some sort of control so that we
- con't involve ourselves in potentially embarrassing situations in the OAS,

e.f- voting to send an investigating committee to Cuba when cur operations

are at a height and Pidel has evidence to present of U.S. participation.

an The President abould not talk to the press. It may-be that dame contacta

: with afew key newsracn should be made -- in the most general way. But at
the President approaches thern personally and the operation does not succeed
it ia inevitable that he will become the focus of another Cuban failure. There

“+, @bout them. Thera are a few newsmen whose contacts in the Cuban community...
“ee wo extensive that they might be able to put together a coherent story. Ko. .-
any approaches are to be made it should be restricted to these; although they
should never be told we are going to wage an all-out operation. In addition,
as rauch contact and operational work as possibis anould be done outside the
Miami areca. ve ,
b
Gar next step should be to desigm te section chiefs, establish thelr authority
and have them make a complete survey of present operations. This would in-
clude a survey of current covertioperations and capacities here and in Miami
{and anywhere else they are going on), as the firat task of the Defense Depart-
ment designee with CLA assistance. The physical headquarters should be

established.

Although the Attoracy General should maiatain a genera operational super-
.- yiston, it is probably unwise for him to be the formal chairman of the group
's, because the visk of identification is fairly high, = > ; ; ne

r

. TOP SECRET

i

ww 50955. vopiilitnailaas



--- Page 60 ---
| EYES CNLY

=3-

:-- If euch identification is made, and the operation is not successfal, ane

other Cuban failure may be directly traceable to the President. I regard

this as fairly rernote in this type of operation bat the danger can be de-

creased if the operation is formally hoaded by someone who is not ao

clearly acting at the direct behest of the President. The Attorney General

can give assistance and maintain general supervision on behalf of the President,
-... working with the Chairman alone -< rather than extending his contacts to in- .

clude all the operation chiefa,° -

TOP SECRET

“EYES ONLY

4
}



--- Page 61 ---
Bob o«

ee

HW: 50955 °.Docld:324235Q5. Page 61 ‘

TOP SECRET -«

Nowamber 22, 1963

if you approve this (i¢ is based on a brief memo from
General Lansdale) I will send it on
you thould have a meeting -- ae soon as possible <<.
with Lansdale and the senior representatives of State,
Defense and CIA. If you want to call me on this after

_ you have read the memo I will suggest @ procedure for
getting them together.

ite way. In addition

"Richard N. Goodwin _

EYES ONLY

eye : we


--- Page 62 ---
HW'S0955 “Dovld: 3242375. Page-62

November 23, 1962

MELIGRAN DUM TO The Secretary of State
; The Secretasy of Defence
The Diveotar ef CLA
The Attorney |Ceseral
General Taylor
Geveral Lansdste —
. Richard Geodwin

The following te a summary of the major decisions which have been mare iu .
regord te the Caba Operation. :

i, We will go abead with the dixsuseed project to help ¢ Cube overthrow the come
muniet regime and eetabligh a free Guba, AM available sesets wih be directed
te thie end ag a mafter of urgest pational prierity,

So The program will be conducted under the genaral guidance af the Attorney
Generel, with Geveral Lenedale os Ma cated af aperations,

3, The program will be raviewed in two weoke in order to determise whether.
Geneval Lanedala will contiome aa chied of operations.

é. The NSC 5412 group will be kept infarmed ef activities,

5. The Secretaries of State and Defense and the Director of the Central Intelli- -
gence Agency will appoint sentor officers of their department as perasnel topre-
oentatives to assist the chief of operations ae required, These sunior officers
should he able to exercize -« either themcalves ov throagh the Secretaries aad
Eivector «= effective operational control over all aspects of thelr Department's
operations Sealing with Caba,

6 Kagwledge of the existence of thia opbration should be restetcted to the recipients —
of thia memorandum, members ef the S412 groug, and the representatives eppointed —

by the Secretariva and the Director. Any Garther disseminatios of this nowledge
will be only with the authority of the Secreterias of Stete or Defense, the Attorney
Generel, ov the Chief of Operations. a

TOP SEGRE TesEYES ONLY



--- Page 63 ---
u

Minutes of

Meet ing
Operation M

or Sp
ONGOOSE,

cunitzer

alos y
ail becau
been cont
sai

48 that the
SC or its own ioher
Such j
lieve

ist

4 Ber

ecial] Group
10 Ag

Soviard
ent.

inte]
da beat

Cali:

Uncoreg
retaliacio
lin big

Bust 1962

yo thac jy
Change
itior
eontinge
HR oon th
2 OF Chis

Gkade

TF

: Page 63°
55 Docld:32423505
HW 509

(Augmented) on

as WOE ld=vide
Ceer,

PHONCRTY OF
WETS HOLS ay


--- Page 64 ---
BW 50955 DoclId:324273505 -Page 64

4, Ne. Rusk emphasized the desir

ability of attempting to

create a split between Castro and Old-line Cownunists, Ue pointed
out that such a split would be bodad to be beneficial to U.S,
interests no matter which way thelbalance of power swung. In this
general connection, it was hard fdr him co visualize a valid pretext
for U.S, military intervention in Cuba under any circumstances .
currently foreseen, However, should reasonably viable resistance
develop to the extent for example Ithat some provinces might oppose
the. Havana Govermacnat, -then the U.S. might desire to give suppore

fo such provincial officials,

In response to the above) Mr. MceCone Pointed out that at

the moment the previous ly-cited frictions between
-old-line Communises have been resolved in Castro's

Castro and the

favor, and no

issue currently exists, There has additionally been at least a
Ccuporary rapprochement between Fidel and Moscow.
this of course may be Cemporary. Ue said that ‘there has been some
success in recruiting Cuban officials abroad to work for the U.S.,
and that there have been some defections,

Ne indicated that

5. The discussion then turned Co the objectives of the
MONGOOSE program. Mr, McNamara questioned whether

the building up of agen€ assets within Cuba fr
hurt the U.S. in the eyes of world Opinion,

we cannot S¢parate

om actions that would
This led to the Suge

Gestion by Ceneral Taylor that we’ should consider changing the

over-all objective from one of overthrowing the Cas

of causing its visible failure,

In this context Mr. McCond

then: presented

Cro regime to one

‘an alternate

plan (called hereafter the NCTA variance’) to the Stepped-up Course B
described by General Lansdale, which he gaid had been prepared as a
result of the conclusion that stepped-up B would not in fact result
in the overthrow of Castro, He emphasized that the

should not be undertaken unless the U.s,

attributability for the necessary act

stepped-up plan

is prepared to accept

ions, including the eventual

use of U.S, military force. Hr, McCone said that a

risk inviting an uprising, which migh
bath if unsupported. Not only would
would also be a high noise level ‘in t
would be created which would require

On the other hand, the CIA

Mr. MeCone's view, avoid all of these

invite an uprising. . Again he repcate
however, face ‘a stronger Cuba in the

-

t result ina
the U.S. be bl

intervention.

variant now pr
dangers beeau
d his view tha
future, ;

stepped-up B will
lungary-type blood
amed,-but there

he press and eventually a situation

Oposed would, in
Se it would not
t the U.S. might,

PROPERTY OF
JHE WHITE HOUSE OFFICE


--- Page 65 ---
for consideration

mo ; 6. The principal members |of the Special Group felt, after
. sone discussion, that the CIA variance should be developed further

at’next. Thursday's meeting of the Special Croup.

Mr. McCone was asked to stress ¢cononic sabotage, and to emphasize
measures to foment a Castro-oldline Communist split. It was

emphasized that ar

. | . .
ny actions under this plan must be so designed as

to avoid major attribution to the U.S.

7. General

Lemnitzer told the Group that the Navy does not

‘wish Guantanamo used as a base for Operational activities, as

suggested by CIA.

He said that ithe other Chiefs have not yet given

an opinion on this but he thought that they would agree with the

Navy, as he himself does. The view is that this base is too important
to the U.S, and too vulnerable to Cuban pressure -to take the chance”
of provoking Cuban reaction. The State representatives agreed with

this view.

8. ‘fr. Bundy suggested that. a hard look be taken at the
possibility of support to selected Cuban exiles on a strictiy
"disengaged" basis; in other words, should they be given covert
financial and material support, with tle idea of seeing what they

could generate on

their own, .

9. Nr. Rusk suggested that continued pressure should. be
placed on Castro by keeping incerest in the prisoner issue alive.

10. Action t

CIA to p

ao be taken:

repare a new version of its variant plan, in

accordance with the above-summarized discussion. This should be

ready by Wesnesday, August 15th.

cc: General Lansd

eg 4

Attachment |- Agend

HW 50955 Docld: 324734505 “Page 65

Thomas A.. Parrott

Safes fee

a for Meeting

PHUPERTY OF

wii WHITE HOUSE OFFICE



--- Page 66 ---
jiu UP uLUNET-MOFUAN |
jcPECIAL HAR {DLING
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 7
WASHINGTCN 25, 0.¢. * Ss)

; 13 August 196200

MEMORANDUM FOR WILLIAM HARVEY, CIA
ROBERT HURWITCH, STATE
GEN, BENJAMIN HARRIS, DEFENSE <
LON WILSON, USIA

KK

From: Brig. Gen. Lansdale Sa

Subject: Alternate Course B

FI In compliance with the desires and guidance expressed in the

j j 10 August policy meeting on Operation Moncoose, we will produce
d an outline of an alternate Course 3 for submission. The CIA paper
“Operational Plan (Aeduced Effort} will be used as the starting
basis. ;

Since this is to be a bare outline, to permit further policy
guidance to be developed, I believe the paper need contain only
a statement of objectives and a livt of irmplementing activities. .
The list of activities will be under the headings of: Intelligence,
Political, Economic, Paycholosical, Faramilitary, and Military.
f
We will hold an Operational Representatives work session in
my office, at 1460 hours, Tuesday, 14 Aucust, to complete the
outline paper for submission. Euch of you is to bring 5 copies of
completed assiqued work to this work session, to permit each of
us to work from a full set of drafts.
Papers required irom each of you ior the Tuesday meeting:
— Mr. Harvey: Intelligence, Political (splitting the regime,
7 : ~h, Economic (sabotaze, Mmited
“deception), and Paramilitary. Also, any suggestions for inclusion
{n other sections of the paver. .

Mr. Hurwitch: Statement of Objectives, Political, and
Economic. ilso, any suggestions for inclusion in other sections
of the paper. ;

_EXCLUDE iD FROM ATOR ATTC ]

_ eo eeCUUDED Peet
i, 2 This document canta -
nite Copy No. a
~~ 7 —_ ae ~
al ~ 6 QBs <

HW 50955, DoeId:32423505 Page 66


--- Page 67 ---
. TOP SECTEI-NOFGR Nt
i SPECIAL HANDLING
SPECIAL i ————

Gen. Harris: Economic (limited deception), Paramilitary
{limited deception), and Military. Also, any suggestions for
inclusion in other sections of the paper.

Mr. Wilson: Paychological (including covert). Also, any
suggestions for inclusion in other sections of the paper.

.HW 50955 Docld:32423505 Page 67


--- Page 68 ---
( : - - , - So a 14 August 1962,

MiEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Divector (Plans)

SUBJECT “t Operation MONGOOSE

1, Action, None, This memorandum is for your information,
2, Reference is made to our conversation on 13 August 1962,
concerning the memorandum of that date from General Lansdale,
: ~ Attached is a copy of this rnemorandum, excised froin which are
four words in the second line of the penultimate paragraph on

page l. ‘These four words were "Including. liquidation. of leaders, '

3. “She question of assassination, partic ularly of F idel Castro,
WAS brought up by Secretary McNamara at the mecting of the
Special Group (Auginented) in Secretary Rusk's orfice on 10 August,
It was the obvious consensus at that meeting, in answer toa
comment by Mr. Kd Murrow, that this is not a subject which
has been made a matter of official record. Itook careful notes on
the comiments at this mecting on this point, and the Special Group
(Augmented) is notiexpecting any. wrilten comunents or study on
this point. f ,

4, Upon receipt of the atta¢hed memorandum, I called
Tansdale's office and, in his absence, pointed out to ¥ rank Hand
‘ the inadmis sibility, and stupidity of putting this type of comment in
writing in sucha document, LTadvised Frank Mand that, as far
as CIA was concerned, we would write no document pertaining to

this and would participate in no open meeting discussing it. :
I strongly urged Hand to re cominend to Lansdale that he excise .
the phrase in question from all copies of this Ynemoranduin, in-
cluding those disséminated to State, Defense, and USTA. Shortly
thereafter, Fansdale called back and left the rnessage that

he are eed and thathe had done so,

HY 50955 DocId:32423505 Page 68


--- Page 69 ---
fon.
5. For your, information also, in your absence and Since
the attached rnemorandum already had been distributed and in
view of the possibility that this rnight corne to the Director's
attention, TL inforrmally briefed Walt Elder on the above.

WILLIAM K, HARVEY
‘Chief, Task Force W

ale dtd 13 Aug 62,

Attachraent :

Memo fr Gen Lansd

HW 50955 Docld:32423505 Page 69 :


--- Page 70 ---
| ro -

INIERVJEW AND MEETING SUMMARY Page 1 of .¢

INTERVIEW WITH RICHARD GOODWIN : S SE Nout

Date: May 27, 1975 Time: 10: 00 a.m.

Place: Goodwin's residence, 1536 32nd St. ‘NW
Participants: Sel. Com. - David Aaron, . Rick Inderfurth, Greg Treverton
Subject: Intelligence Activities in Latin America

Submitted by: Gregory F. Treverton

a
During the 1960 Presidential campaign, Goodwin did foreign

policy work for John Kennedy, specializing in Latin America. After the
election he moved into the whied House to handle Latin America. During
that period he spoke with the President about a Latin American matter
on the average once a day. Goodwin left the White House in the fall of
1962, becoming Deputy Assistant |Secretary of State for Inter-American

Affairs under, first, Robert Woodward and then Edwin Martin. After

working for the Peace Corps, Goodwin was brought back to the White

House by President Johnson,‘ in the spring of 1964, after the Panama

crisis. At that time, however, he did not specialize on Latin America,
- instead writing speeches for Johnson. He left the Administration late

I

in 1965.

1. Assassinations:
In general, Goodwin had not heard much specific talk of as-
sassination, although it would not have surprised him if it had gone
on. He mentioned one specific instance in which he had heard talk of
assassinating Castro. After the Bay of Pigs, a Cuba Task Force was
‘established, first chaired. by Paul Nitze and then by Goodwin in his
capacity as White House Staff Officer. At a meeting of the Task Force,

held at the State Department, McNamara suggested "getting rid of Castro,|'

someone from the CIA, perhaps Bissell, then asked if McNamara meant

HW 50955 Docld:32423505 Page 70 Gs


--- Page 71 ---
i

1 :

jem : ~
I

i

INTERV [EW AND MEETING SUMMARY Page 2 of 6

FILE:

"Executive Action." McNamara responded that he did and stressed his

interest in the idea. However, | Goodwin did not bring the topic up later

. i
in the meeting after McNamara left. To Goodwin, the idea was not reason

: '
able even apart from moral objections, for the Bay of Pigs had shown tha
Cuba was politically stable; Castro would merely have been replaced
with Raul or with Che Guevara, both worse than Castro. Somewhat later,
Goodwin gat in on an interview Tad Szulc had with Kennedy in which the
President pledged not to kill Castro. Szule reported that pledge in an
article in Esquire. When he finished his period as Chairman of the Cuba
i
Task Force, Goodwin wrote a memo recommending that the United States
let Castro alone; anything the United States did to him could only but-
tress his position in Latin America.

During his time at the State Department, Goodwin met every
week or so with E. C. King, Chief of the Western Hemisphere Division
of the CIA, and King never mentioned a plan to assassinate Castro. Nor
did Robert Kennedy ever mention such a plan to Goodwin when Goodwin
worked for Kennedy, in 1966 and, 1967.

Goodwin did believe, however, that the United States was in-
volved, at least indirectly, in the successful plot on Trujillo's life.
During the Eisenhower Administration, the United States had severed
diplomatic relations with Trujillo and attempted to isolate the Dominica
Republic. There were frequent reports that Trujillo. was about to be as-
_sassinated, but the assassination never came off. In fact, the govern-
ment was surprised when it occurred. HenryDearborn, the American Consul
in Santo Domingo, had been charged with staying in contact with anti-
Trujillo forces. Prior to the assassination, he had transferred some

i

_ weapons, presumably handguns, to those forces. Goodwin suspected that

HW 50955 Docld:32423505 Pagé 7i | | gS


--- Page 72 ---
4
INTERVIEW AND MEETING SUMMARY Page _3 of ¢

FILE:

the President probably did not Ienow of the gun transfer, but he said

that the assassination and the U.S. role with respect to it would have
come as no surprise to ‘the President. He, doubted ‘that the CIA even
would have had to clear the transfer, although a general policy of that
sort might have been passed by [the Special Group.

Goodwin reported no other mention of assassinations. In fact,
he said he once heard a CIA man say that assassination was a bad idea
because once started, it never lended. However, an agent in the field
might regard killings of one sdrt or. another as within his mission in
supporting one political factidn over another. And of course someone
might have gotten carried away. It was clear from the Bay of Pigs that
the CIA sometimes acted without, or even against, instructions (e.g.
by bringing Batista followers into the Bay of Pigs invasion team). In

general, Latin American work seemed to attract the worst personnel in

all Washington agencies including the CIA.

2. CIA Activities in Brazil: -
Goodwin knew little of CIA activities in Brazil. The United
States had strongly backed Quadros and never liked Goulart. ‘In the

period before 1964, the U.S. gave political support to anti-Goulart

i
factions: followers of Kubitschek and even to the Furtado in the

Brazilian northeast. The U.S. -had been involved in Brazilian elections
for many years and presumably spent a good deal in the 1963 congres-
sional elections.On the military side, Walters was brought from Rome

to keep a contact with the Brazilian military. How much further

Walters' activities might have extended Goodwin did not know.

HW 50955 DocId:32423505 Page 72. iV


--- Page 73 ---
te

INTERVIEW AND MEETING SUMMARY . Page 4 of

FILE:

3. CIA Activities in Chile:

The Kennedy Administration decided that left wing democratic
forces in Latin America were the only means of combatting communist
influence and promoting development in the region. That decision was
applied to Chile, and the U.S.| switched its support from the conserva-
tive Alessandri. Goodwin sat in on meetings of the Special Group only
rarely, only if Latin America were the subject of the meeting. As he
remembered it, the proposals that came to the Special Group were genera
statements, policy papers, not. descriptions of recipients of support or
conduits. In line with the policy, support was given to left democrati
political elements. The U.S. certainly provided assistance to the
Christian Democrats in the 1964 elections, but Goodwin did not know
how much. The figure of $20 million, mentioned by Stern, did not seem
inconceivable to Goodwin. He contested, ‘however, the assertion that
the Chilean election was the most intensely watched election in Washing:
ton since the 1948 Italian campaign. From his vantage point in the

White House it did not seem so.

4. Changes during the Johnson! Administration:

‘Johnson cared less about Latin America than had Kennedy--
Johnson was interested only in Mexico--and so knew less about covert
actions in the region. Thomas Mann was left to run Latin American
policy, although the President did become active in the two crises--
Panama and then the Dominican Republic. Goodwin saw a sharp change
in United States' policy under Mann. Mann supported the military .and

conservative elements in Latin American societies, and American support

HW 50955 DocId:32423505 Page 73 | ; ?


--- Page 74 ---
|

INTERVIEW AND MEETING SUMMARY Page 5 of ¢

| FILE:
for left democratic reform ended. Goodwin professed himself puzzled

by Johnson's assertion that he had discovered a "murder incorporated"

in the Caribbean. The only specific instance Johnson ever cited was

Trujillo, yet Johnson had known about the Trujillo assassination from

the very beginning and so could hardly have "discovered" it after he

became President.

5.° Covert Operations and Counterinsurgency:

When asked about the ethos surrounding covert actions during
the Kennedy Administration, Goodwin responded that the major emphasis
was counterinsurgency, not covert action. There was certainly no

1 :

reluctance to use covert action, but no one believed that American

“objectives could be secured through it. Counterinsurgency was some-
thing different. A good deal of money was spent training police throug
AID, much more was spent through the Pentagon equipping Latin American
militaries, and there was as well some CIA activity. At that point,
the U.S. really believed that the communists could not get elected to
power and that the threat was subversion. Paramilitary operations
“were considered by the Special 'Group (counterinsurgency). Latin
American matters were considered there, and in some ways Latin

America was considered a kind of training ground for Southeast Asia.
Goodwin believed that in sum U.S. counterinsurgency efforts made little
difference to the course of events in Latin America. Cuba could not

in any case provide support to guerilla movements in South America
without substantial support from the Soviet Union, and the guerilla

movements that began had little indigenous support.

HW 50955 DocId:32423505 Page 74


--- Page 75 ---
HW 50955

|

: |
INTERVIEW AND MEETING SUMMARY Page 6

i

In response to a question about NSAM's, Goodwin noted that
these came out of the Bundy shop, which had little formal staff. Good-
win often wrote these documents. They were both general and, on
occasion, specific, indicating groups to be supported and the like.

Kennedy wanted to know the details of American activities in Latin

America.

i
6. Goodwin Suggestions:

Goodwin believed it impossible to control the activities of
intelligence organizations without becoming involved in their day-to~
day operations. “What is required is an active Congressional committee,
on the model of the early Joint Atomic Energy Committee, with an active

staff. Once the President is permitted Both to decide what is a major

operation, and thus needs to be communicated to Congress, and who to
tell, the game is over. Confidence in men will not do; institutional
checks are required. ,

With respect to people to be interviewed, Goodwin mentioned

that the Station Chief in Mexico functioned as a kind of regional sub-

director. He also thought we might talk with the FBI person in Puerto
Rico, with Arthur Schlesinger,. and with Tad Szulc. In response to a
I
‘
question, Goodwin indicated that Nixon had been interested in the Bay

of Pigs through Cushman. He thought that Douglas Dillon might know of

that.

DoclId:32423505 Page 75


--- Page 76 ---
i (OP SECRET

aint : ; 25

8 . : i

3 1 the United States. Several months later, I presume because

o a 2 of that trip and several other contacts I Maintain with

i ) representatives of the Cuban government at the United Nations

2 4 and the Organization of American States, because of my personal
5 friendship with a number of people at the White House and
6 Mr. Goodwin, Mr. Donnegan ‘and others, ina conversation with
7 Mr. Goodwin it was suggested that I come and see the Attorney
8 | General. I was invited to lunch with Mr. Kennedy at the Justice
9 Department. We discussed in considerable length the situation

10 in Cuba following tha invasion, the pros and cons of some
ll |). different possible actions by the United States government in

12 that context.

Lot : t .
At the end of this conversation, the Attorney General

14 asked me whether I would have objections to meeting with his

WARD & PAUL
w
Ow

15 brother, the President. I ssaid I would of course be pleased
i

16 to do so.
7 The following day I received a call from the White House
1g || indicating that the President would like for me to come in at

. i ;
11:00 o'clock in the morning on that day in November, which I
1 .

3 ag

é 20 || did. And I was received by the President in the company of

: 2) || Mr. Goodwin in the Oval Office for a conversation which lasted,
G 20 if memory serves, in excess of an hour and a half, in which the

i : 1 .

“ 23 President discussed a number of his views on Cuba in the wake

o : pa of the Bay of Pigs, asked me a number of questions concerning

3 25 my conversations with Premier Castro, a general review of the

TOP SECRET

BW 50955 Bocld:32423505 Page 76


--- Page 77 ---
nt TOP SECRET Le
2: : . : |
3 1 situation in Cuba, you know, what the United States should do,
2 j
o g 2 could do, might #0 in terms of either in a hostile way or in
i 3 establishing soma kind ofa dialogue, most relevant of which
. i
: 4 I suppose was that at one point the President rather unexpected y
5 turned to me and said what would you say, what would you) think,
6 if. I.decided to authorize. the assssination of Premier Castro?
2 : Let me add for the record that the precise wording sppears:
‘ . - ° [
8 in the Esquire article from the notes taken at the time., I am
9 now paraphrasing from memory. This was a rather -- 7 \
: ' {
10 ; _ Mr, Aaron, “Let me read this into the.record. "We chatted
ll for a while about Cuba, _ and then Kennedy ‘leaned forward | lin his
, 12 rocking chair and hurled a question: at me: ‘What would .you think
> .
“™ é 13 ‘if I ordered Castro ‘to be assassinated? ’’
: 14 . Mr.- Szulc. I was taken aback and so indicated to the Preside:
15 Feene best of my recollection, I said in the first instance asa
16 practical matter I thought this would not make all that much
117 difference even if he were because I thought that by then the
1g || Cuban structure had been | stablished to a sufficient deqree
. 19 where the murder and disappearance of Fidel Castro would not
3 i
: 20 | necessarily mean: ‘the collapse of the governing system, if this
Fi 21 were. the purpose of the United States government. : |
i 22 in the second place, it was more important to ma, r said
. 23 to the President, that my personal feeling was that the united
3 i
C : 24 States government should not be party to murders and political
. : 235 assassinations at which point the President leaned back and
TOP SECRET nt
. ‘ ; i
Do, ; |

HW 50955 Docld:32423505 Page 77


--- Page 78 ---
amt — | 27
2 1 smiled and said, well 1 wads testing you. I agree with you
o é 2 -completely. | .
: 3 , And then he went on for a few minutes. to make the point
; 4 || how strongly he felt and his brother felt that the United State
5 for moral reasons should never be ina situation of having
6 recourse to assassination in foreign policy. Again, the
7 precise quotes and the precise paraphrase I placed in the article
8 and again I'm paraphrasing from memory now.
9 And the President added in this context that the reason I-
10 have raised it with you, or words to this effect, is because
li I am under very, very strong or powerful pressure from certain
; 12 People, whom he did not identify, to authorize an operation
os i 13 resulting in the assassination of Premier Castro. And I think
g 14 we talked about this for A few more minutes, and T think I
15 ‘repeated the points I made originally and the President said
16 he felt very strongly that same way and the fact he was testing
VW me or trying to see what my response as a reporter or as a
18 citizen would be. |
19 I might: add that sevdral days ago Mr. Goodwin and rE had
: 20 _the opportunity to discuss this and compare our respective
° a recollections of it, and Mr. Goodwin's recollection is exactly
: , 22 the same as mine. We discussed this at some length, this
2. ;
‘ 23 being last week, and ths subject being relevant to the current
C i 24 flow of news and Mr. Goodwin made the point to me, obviously if
: 25 '.President Kennedy were planning to authorize the assassination
TOP SECRET .
HW 50955 Docld:32493505 Page 78 ° :


--- Page 79 ---
amt

Phone (Area 202) 544-6000

WARD & PAUL
w

24

C.

410 First Street, S.E., Wasnington, 0.C. 20003

25

HW 50955 Docld:32423505 Page 79

a)
y

TOP

|
or an attempt to kill him

professional duty to rush

conversation, even though

!

in disclaiming any desire
My impression at the
is that the President was

revulsion to such an

Mr. Aaron. Let

with Mr. Goodwin?
Mr. Szule. Thea most
Mr. Aaron. .YeS, the

Mr.

June of this year.
paragraph from your artic
under great pressure from

that he himself violently

i
i

28

of Castro, he would not likely: be discussing it with you in

the full knowledge ‘of a reporter and if Castro were killed

would surface you would have the
to yourtypewriter. and report on this

it was on 2 personal basis. And

Mr. Goodwin's judqment,’ and in which I concur, was that
presumably the President would not have floated this issue
with me, and this is really responsive to my own effort to

re-evaluate after the passage of time the President's sincerity

to do so,
time'and today fourteen years later

sincere and serious in affirming his

Do,
idea of assassination.

me ask you, when was your conversation
i . . .

recent one?

one you just mentioned.

Szulc. Last Friday which would have been the 6th of

{

Mr. Aaron. May I read. into the record ‘the following

le. “Kennedy leaned back in his: chair

smiled, and said that he had been testing me because he was

advisers in the Intelligence

community (whom he did not name) to have Castro killed, but

opposed it on the grounds that for

_ TOP SECRET



--- Page 80 ---
“50955 -Decld:32493505 “Page 60.”

GOODWIN] (TRUJILLO)

The papers produced by Mr. Goodwin on 7/16/75
contained some Trujillo-telated material. Certain
documents were selected from this material and are pro-
duced herein under Tabs S and T. All of the attached
Trujillo-related documents have been produced before the
Committee, and Mr. Goodwin has been questioned concern-
ing them. They are attached again herein for possible
use in connection with questions concerning handwritten

notations appearing on the documents.

TAB S. May 13, 1961 Memorandum to Goodwin
a re CIA Covert Activities in the

Dominican | epublic
1

Page 2 of this document contains, on the
original ribbon copy, a pencilled-in circle.
Goodwin stated on/7/16/75 that this circle
was placed on the original copy of the
memorandum by himjand indicates that the
encircled material (a report of the passage

of revolvers and carbines) struck Goodwin

as both significant and new to him. Further,
the word "neutralize" is underscored in

pencil on the original copy of the memorandum.
Goodwin might be questioned concerning the

significance of this underscore.

TAB T. Various drafts, together with the

——oTiginal of the 5/29/61 cable from the State
Department to Dearborn are attached herein.
Goodwin stated on /7/16/75 that the handwriting
on pages numbered (237, 238, 239, and 240 is
his handwriting. The handwriting on pages
233, 234, and 235, a subsequent draft of the
same proposed cable is not Goodwin's. -
Goodwin suggested |this handwriting may be that
of President Kennedy.

{
|
|
| i
|
:



--- Page 81 ---
13 May 1961

MEMORANDUM: ‘
SUBJECT : CIA Covert Activities, Dominican Republic
, i

Attached is the special briefing paper on CIA covert activities directed

against the Dominican “Republic which was requested by Mr. Richard Goodwin of

the White House. HT



--- Page 82 ---
It.’

a EVES QULY

SkUh!

PROGRAM OF COVERT ACTION FOR /THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

BACKGROUND , po
A. On 29 December 1960 the special Group approved a plan of covert
action to support the intemal and exiled Dominican dissidents which

involved provision for increased propaganda directed against Trujillo,

and the finencial support of selected exiled groups. Additionally this

‘authority included authorization for, CIA to make available to selected

exile groups communications and equipment support necessary for them to
develop s capability to undertake the infiltration of personnel and
equipment into the Dominican Republic. Since none of the exiled groups
had an existing underground organization within the area, it was the
Special Group's concept that this delivery capability could be eventually
used to support the plans and activities of the internal opposition with
whom the Agency and the Consulate are currently in contact.

B. On 12 January 1961 the Special Group authorized CIA to make
available to Dominican dissidents a limited supply of small arms and
other materials on the condition that the internal opposition develop
the capability to receive’ these naterials and that the materials be in-
troduced into the Dominican Republic by Dominicans themselves.

CURRENT COVERT ACTION OPERATIONS

A. In late Januery 1962, cIA advised selected internal opposition

leaders that we were prepared to make available to them limited supplies

of arms, communications, equipment, ‘and sabotage materials which they

had repeatedly requested provided they developed ® capability to receive

PYES pl y-
| SECRET



--- Page 83 ---
it via air drops’ or sea infiltration. To date the internal.opposition has | :
not been able to develop this capability, nor have they been able to - i

nominate training candidates for code; radio operators or saboteurs.

Trujillo's security services, the understandable. fear, that prevails .

throughout the Republic of being caught or suspected of anti-' “Trujillo,

e

This turn of events is primarily due to the comprehensive nature of : |
|
k
:

activities,-and the fact that the organized internal opposition apparently ~
consists of only a few individuals with no real underground structure. ; fi
cLyhas had in the direct custody of its Station in Ciudad Trujillo a

very limited supply of weapons and grenades. In response to the urgent

equests from the internal: opposition leaders for personal defense

a as

eapons attendant to their projected efforts to neutralize TRUJILLO, : /
( eeeneneneemnmmananined
a (3) .38 Cal revolvers! and three :(3) carbines with accompanying /
munition have been passed by secure means to the opposition. The : /
‘recipients have repeatedly. requested | ladditional armed support. va
7 ORAS established working: relationships with selected exile”

groups. These relationships have taken into account that-President
. ies memes

-Betancourt of Venezuela has in effect designated former Costa Rican
President Jose Figueres ag his emissdry and representative to work with
Dominican exile groups. Through Figueres and with the knowledge of
President Betancourt, CIA is providing financial support and technicel
guidance to the following activities’.

|

(1) The development of a Dominican exile council in San Jose,

Costa Rica, composed of representatives of the two older exile organizations,

|
i
'



--- Page 84 ---
~ a representative designated by Betancourt,

t

and chaired by Figueres: The

council had its first organizational meeting in San Jose on 12 May 1961.

Subject to CIA's review of the cones’ S proposed program and with the

concurrence of President petancourt, CIA has indicated: to Betancourt

and Figueres that it is prepared: to
the amount of $15,000 & month.
council will undertake propaganda activit
and train selected Dominicans i

and public administration s© as to equip them

ponsibility in any successor government.

that an exile paramilitary force be trained, put C

activity to date since neither Betancour

clear plan for its eventual

groups represented on Figueres:

port among the internal dissidents.

n 1 denoeratic process, &

support. the council's program in
It is Pigueres! initial concept that the

ies directed against Trujillo,

to assume positions of res-

‘pi gueres has also proposed

TA has discouraged this

‘ nor Figueres have indicated &

use. It is CIA! 5 judgment that the exile

‘ council nave little if any popular sup-

However one of the chief advantages

that can and is peing gained by support < of the council is the number of

credits that this gives to the United iS)

tates Government in its dealings

with Betancourt and Figueres an utilizing them in other operations.

Trujillo is disposed of. This

Betancourt has been adamant thet no action pe taken against Castro

until

support has served to neutralize his

attitude on that point since. it amounts; 0 a guarantee to Betancourt of

the United States's basic attitud

to solidify ‘the attitudes of dissident:

not anti-U.8. and will make”

U.S. Government objectives onc

HW 50955 DoclId:

exiled Dom:

e tovard Trujillo. Likewise it serves

inicens so that they are

them more approachable and amenable to

Eyes e iy
_ SECRET

e Teajitio is overthrown.

(2) .The conduct

administrative skills,



--- Page 85 ---
capability in Venezuela.

| SEUKHL

CIES QALY
Ty

of radio propaganda from Ponee, Puerto Rico, which is under the direction

of Horacio ORNES, Secretary General of Vanguardia Revolucionaria Domini -

cana (VRD). This radio program is heard in the Dominican Republic as

the voice of the ORNES organization. . -
(3) CIA has refurbished a small yacht belonging to ORNES so as

to give it the capability to deliver small quantities of arms or _Personnel

into the Dominican Republic. This potential para-military boat capability

has not been utilized to. date. It be contemplated that both the ORNES

propaganda program and this Limited boat capability w will be absorbed by

the exile council now being formed by Figueres.

Cc. With the knowledge of President Betancourt, and using his govern~-
ment as the ostensible source of funds, CIA has provided limited financial
support to a small group of Dominicans who are developing a para-military
i

D. CIA has recently re-located Dr. Juan Isidro Jimenez Grullon from
Venezuela to San Juan, Puerto Rico. Jimenez, a physician and university
professor, is a highly respected Dominican exile and enjoys the confidence
of the internal opposition. He isicurrently working with the Puerto
Rican Government in developing a thaining program within the structure of
the Puerto Rican Government. The objective of this program is to pro-
vide "on-the-job" training for selected Dominicans in democratic processes
and selected administrative skills. ‘Through Jimenez and a small group
of recently exiled Dominicans who were active in the internal opposition, -
CIA is in the process. of establishing communication channels to the in-

ternal opposition which will supplement those currently in being through

EVES AMEY

SEGRE!


--- Page 86 ---
Iv.

our Station in Ciudad Trujillo.

'

E. CIA has a continuing program utilizing news media assets through-

out the hemisphere in an effort to discredit Trujillo.
COVERT ACTIVITIES CIA IS PREPARED TO UNDERTAKE BUT HAS NOT INITIATED

A. -Train selected members of the internal opposition as code radio
operators. CIA has the appropriate radio equipment "on-the-shelf".at
our Station in Ciudad Trujillo. However, this program has not been ini-
tiated due to the internal ‘opposition's failure to provide individuals
who sre able to undergo the required training outside of the Dominican
Republic and willing to run | the risk of having the radio equipments in,
their possession. j

B. Train selected members of the opposition in sabotage and under-

ground resistance techniques. Here again the internal opposition has

provided no training candidates or developed a capability to receive

explosive materials through clandestine channels.
POSSIBLE COVERT ACTIONS WHICH REQUIRE ADDITIONAL AUTHORIZATION

A. CIA has a supply ‘of four (4) calibre 45 sub-machine guns and a
small number of grenades which are currently in the direct custody of
our Station in Ciudad Trujillo. A secure means of passing these weapons
to the internal opposition, for their use in personal defense attendant

| .
to their projected efforts' to remove Trujillo can be developed by the
od .

45 A
( i
!

Station.
B. CIA can initiate. leaflet Arps over the Dominican Republic,
in response to past requests from the internal opposition for leaflets

exploiting the excesses Of the Trujillo regime.
EYES ONLY
SECRET

nw 50058” Doel



--- Page 87 ---
| i |
C. While to date the internal opposition has developed no capability
| ! -

to receive arms or sabotage materials by either air or sea delivery, CIA
CS - io
could initiate operations to cache jsuch supplies off the coast of the

. i

Dominican Republic for later retrival by the opposition when they develop
| :
|

such a capability. ;

D. Initiate the training of para-military cadres. CIA has,been

reluctant to recommend the initiation of such training since current
. ;
information indicates that any invasion of the Republic unless massively
| Hl : :
supported by overt action would be impractical.
. : . . ' .

5

HW. 4


--- Page 88 ---
waved

!
:
i
1

HW 50955 DocId:32423505 Page 66.

“EOR DEARBORN FRCM DEPARTMINT

aa | Wort bbe eat TE eet ee ee
THE WHITE ¢ bse OFFICE wenene Keer hn cad P24 Shor hey ae
1 foods menen ge nee? * . Le

SECRET mThis document consists of 2 pages
Copy No. of 9 copies; Series

(Lapel -poufey

i. President has now .approved contingency plans somewhat revised subsequen:

your departure and copy will be pouched to you soonest. Hope this will resolve

uncertainties reflected ref but your comments and requests for any necessary

. *; «
oa

clarification will be welcomed.

2. Department appreciates valuable work performed’ by Amo. Farland and your-
self and CAS in developing pro-US attitude anong dissident elements. ‘Would hope
this could be retained and strengthened but only if at a cost acceptable fron
standpoint US national interest. If price tagt for friendship ox dissidents,
whose action capabilities and realistic prosrects thus far comain unknown quant.
places too great strain upon morel position and principics for which US stands o.
iavolves risss which in our considered judgment sneuld not be accepted, veel sui
you will agree we should stand firm,

“3. While fully congaizent Yunicue circumstances within Jgominican kepubi:
which precluded normal CAS operation, Departament is nonetheless deeply concerae:
by degree to which covert setivitics this case nave been forced io cevicte Aron
normal cover end cut-out safeguarus with xesufix result ISG too opynly identifin
with what should be clandestine activities.

4, Running through entire ndak dilemma has been conflict between bo objec
“(1) To be so associated with removal Trujillo regine as to cerive cre
among DR dissidents ang liberal elements throughout Li tin America;
(2) To disassociate US from any obvious intervention in Dominican

Republic and.even more. so from any political assassination which migiy

occur,

gat


--- Page 89 ---
oot pean teen sae a

i
1
‘ :
4

1
HW 50955 Docld:324273505 Page 69

-tive government offering

| PROPERTY OF
LE WHITE HOUSE OFFIC?

In Department's considered opinion, former objective cannot, repeat not, easily:

1

override latter. For this reason you should not, repeat not, inform trusted

opposition leaders at thisx time of draft document which you now hold nor deliver

copy to them.

5, In May 19 meeting here with, Yaguate and Cibso Department spokesman «sous h

disabuse them expectation USG acting cither through Department or CIA could be

party to any political assassination, At same time assured them this government’

continuing sympathy for lecitimate aspirations Dominican pecple achieve represent
§ syap Y rey ; pr

« civil rights and guarantees all citizens.

6, In response your comment ‘re. covert activities program you should be

t's growing feeling any continuation thereof shoula be made conte.

aware Departmen

upon deepening of cover arrangements so as effectively to disassociate USG.

Z, In light foregoing Suggest you withhold further action and to zxx extent
: : | . .

feasible substantave conversation§ with dissidents pendi

|

i

ng receipt documents now
to be pouched,

4
i i .
‘ END CF MESSAGE

AR: Fudewine: jse favfey

Weer


--- Page 90 ---
SECPET

| | |
|

THE UNDER SECRETARY OF STATE
WASHINGTON

Hay 26, 1961

MEMORANDUM FOR: Mr. HceGeorge Lundy _
the White House * .

-

Following un on our discussion of the Dominican Republic at
yesterday's meeting of the Snecial Group, I am forwarding you a
draft telecram which we would like to send to Henry Dearborn, our
Consul General in Civdad Trujillo, supplementiny the guidance he
will be receiving on the recently approved contingency planse
The text of this draft telegram has been snown to the Agency and
agreed to by them. I am also forwarding copies of the exchange
with Dearborn leading up to the present draft telegram to him.

I lmow it will be. difficult for the President to find time
before he leaves to have a look at this but, in view of the situ-
ation in the Deminican Republic, I feel that he should approve it
personally so as to be sure that it is consistent with his views
as stated in the HSC Record of Actions for May 5S.

Chester Bowles
Attachments:

Tab A - Proposed outgoing
telegran ; |

Tab B + Previous exchange
of telegrams

5 eas wpe eee

SECRET



--- Page 91 ---
eerie SECRET

PROPOSED TELEGRAM
to US Consul General in
Ciudad Trujillo

FOR DEARBORN FROM DEPARTMENT

|

1. President has now approved contingency plans somewhat revised subse~

quent your departure and copy will be pouched to you soonest, Hope-this will
. |

resolve uncertainties reflected your telegram of May 21 but your comments and

requests for any necessary clarification will be welcomed,

2. Department appreciates valuable work performed by Amb. Farland and your=-
self and CAS in developing pro-US attitude among dissident elements, Would hope
this could be retained and strengthened but only if at a cost acceptable from
standpoint US national interest. If price tag for friendship of dissidents, -
whose action capabilities and realistic prospects thus far remain unknown
quantity, places too great strain upon moral position and principles for which
US stands or involves risks which in our considered judgment should not be accepted,
feel sure you will agree we should stand firm.

3. While fully cognizant unique circumstances within Dominican Republic
which precluded normal CAS operation, Department is nonetheless deeply concerned

by degree to which covert activities this case have been forced to deviate from

normal cover and cut-out safeguards with result USG too openly identified with
what should be clandestine activities. .
4. Running through entire dilenma has been conflict between two objectives:
(1) To be so. associated with removal Trujillo regime as to derive
credit among DR dissidents and liberal elements throughout Latin America;
(2) To disassociate US. from any obvious intervention in Dominican

Republic and even more so from any political assassination which might occur,

SECRET . ‘

cideseasdoos



--- Page 92 ---
| |

SECRET!

-2-.

In Department's considered opinion, former objective cannot, repeat not, easily
override latter. For this reason you should not, repeat not, inform trusted op-
position leaders at this time of draft document which you now hold nor deliver

copy to them. If you believe conditions specified in second and third paras

Department's telegram of May 17 fulfilled, you may advise trusted opposition
leaders that you assume any friendly group seeking to establish authority after
overthrow of Trujillo would promptly declare itself provisional government and

request armed assistance from OAS, US, Venezuela and perhaps other governments.

If reply affirmative, you may advise them orally lines you think such request
should take,

5. In May 19 meeting here with Yaguate and Cibao Department spokesman sought
disabuse them expectation USG acting either through Department or CIA could be

party to any political assassination. At same time assured them this government's

a i

x
bs

continuing sympathy for legitimate aspirations Dominican people achieve represen-_
tative government offering civil rights and guarantees all citizens.
‘6. In response your comment re covert activities program you should be
aware Department's growing feeling any continuation thereof should be made con-
tingent upon deepening of cover arrangements so as effectively to disassociate usG.
7. In light foregoing suggest further action and to extent feasible substan-

tive conversations with dissidents be withheld pending receipt documents now to

be pouched.

!
i
|
: ;
LC

END OF MESSAGE

_ SECRET



--- Page 93 ---
work along chis line has been invaluable. However, Wwe must
3.

[ere a

i Cc
TOP SEC THE WHILE HOUSE’ OFFICE

FOR DEARBORN FROM STATE

1. President has now approved contingency plans dis-

cussed during your stay here with one major exception: You are notes:

to request a pre- signed request for help from Dominican dissicent

groups.
2. We consider it essential that you continue to work to a

strengthen pro-U.S. sentiment among dissident groups. Your

not run risk: of. U.S. associacion with political assa Na ELON Et
“ “ye

VS, cata Crear’ dA Wy 4 ataunets Pertiny coment bee, nk Sep detees Semen an

This last pr sinciple is overrs ‘ding and must preveit in ous paul

situation. However, there is much you can do to prerect Uc.
interests within this framework of policy; imeiucens most o-

anscynes

the. measures in which you are Tow engaged. Specific Ans

tions follow.

3. Continue te inform dissident elements of U.S. eunnere

for thar position, In case of ¢ Gosinenionwn overenroy ok
nyujillo--whether ox not indtreted vy pro-US. group-- the
pro-u.S. group should promptly wake every effort to cong rituce
itself as reasonable and plausiole provisional, ZOVELTRENE

It should inmediate ly declare iuselé such and request agaistance -

from U.S.,; Venezucla, Colombia and OAS. If advance discussions. -

sO TOP SeOKeT



--- Page 94 ---
h
ei pHOPLELY OF
@ oh rue willie HOUSE GEFICE ok
. “| :
~ :

- show that dissidents are favorable to this procedure discuss

. {
‘the specific ‘content of such a request and procedures for
handling it. All possible preparations should be made short”
- og actual formulation in writing of a | aigted] request in advance

of the event. underlying this procedure ig the policy that,

under no circumstances, can we take the chance of a communist —
type takeover in the Dominican Republic even if we must intervene
without a4 request. This last possibility should not be discussed }
with the dissidents. | .

4. Reference to multilateral action in record of actions mm

‘means only that further open sanctions will, be maltilateratl

(8

“and that in the case of direct intervention it would be pre-

ferable: for forces to be multilateral. No broader interpre! cation

is justified. “ALL other U.S. actions--wnether propaganda or
covert activities--will be continued on a bilateral basis.

5. Covert activities are, as you know, very small. due CO
jnability of dissidents to ‘develop a method of receiving supplics
which will effectively disassociate U.S., and failure to provide
candidates for rraining as radio operators or saboteurs. OUL
offer to help along these Lines--provided they develop capacity

and effective cover--remains open. However, you must request

a : ee | a
TOP SECRET
sorte areal

eld: 32423505

Page 94


--- Page 95 ---
. . TO] SECRET PROPERTY OF
@ ; 3 THE WHITE HOUSE OFFICE :
; oo,

\w/ - and receive further specific instructions for any specific

covert activity. At the present time we ave unable to transfer. ~,
arms to dissidents. Tell them that this is because of our
suspicion that method of transier may be unsafe. In actual

fact we feel that the transfer of arms would serve very little

purpose and expose the United States to great danger of bbeisase «po
Stor WAT i

tee eed

EG eiie- ob participacion-iy] assassination acremPc. Tne basic
policy is to continue to hold open offer of covert help, while
carefully examining and clearing the specific help requested.

This is feasible because, in actual fact, the covert help is H

very slight except for verbal encouragement and exchange of /

(®

information.

6. We intend to keep up anti-Trujillo propaganda cambaign

and other external pressures. ; :

7. -FYL, in event overthrow of Trujillo military forces wilh”

chase" bye, : -

be dispatched immediately to [prosiwvesian) positions. Qn recelpe
of request from provisional governme ent, and your concurrence,

A Le gained JO cinf ee Mp, .
we vidlpepeie Lf no request is received and there appears co
be any danger of communist takeover then decision will be wade

in Washington whether to intervene regardless. This makes it i

imperative that a yequest be obtained if at all possible. End F

wees

TOP SECRET

HW 30950... Docld:32423505 -Page-95-


--- Page 96 ---
: TOr SbUKEL Shue nn Ue
- ; : THE WHITE HUUSE OFFICE !

8. Begin conversations immediately with dissidents in-

Ce.

forming them of U.S. position and the necessity for an immediate
request. If they are favorable to this procedure take all ~

possible measures to prepare for the immediate transmittal

of such a request short of the actual preparation of a written

document for advance transfer to you.
. “1

: “ ue et L
Z JPL : i

Ai!

4

<

TOP SECRET



--- Page 97 ---
oo, Oo . Coy end OF

go

aan ee cee a “THe Pwo AOUSE OF FICE

®

Fx Si nein [aw ot. & , 4

1. President has moe aoproved contingency >lant discussed during y-ur |

stay here with one ocH major excention; You are not to request a pre-signed re- : !
quest for help fren Dominican dissident groups.

. 2, We consider it essential that you contimie to verk to siccngtnen pre eat S.

Poets an

sentiment among dissident ETOLTS. Your work along “this line had been icuniisewede,

ken 4 to wr :
However, we 326 must not Pawerr rood muda erat ore danger of disclosing,“ ‘Go, association :

with political assgine tion ortatersention! “nthe Dorimican-Repubbie. This last

mach yoo can do to protect U.5. interests within this framework of policy; including
_

J most of the measures in which you are now encacedy Specific instructions fellows

princizle is overriding and must prevail in doubt fel situatiom, However, there is =
. 7
)
{
“ uate . ~ or . a al a . ‘. t
3, Inteox Conitune to inform dissident elements of U.S. support fcr their .
. 4,

position.. fra case of assassingtion or overthrow of Tresillo--uhether or not
t6l0

initiated by pre-U.5. cro oupe=the | group should powEmotomuy

request for assistance fron V.5., Venezuela, Colombia and the 0,4,.5.. Sais request a

=e
will be responded to Sivorably dy the Tntbel States, Tas Ff .
: i
glye3 the provisional rovernment and reques st hel ip + whe ther or. not they actually 7
=, . a : !
ye pers cae moe es
!
are able to agsume power, If tage are’ fs avorable to this pr Scedure races ‘
. - ee re ee wn
. ‘ . Lor
; +
Ne . 7 on L: : ; -



--- Page 98 ---
| : - me SEATS 7 roe entt uk
, | , re, WHITE HOUSE oFFICE ;
| :

Dacilrn jwe~ st te co

+. ix
i
1. Presicent has now approved contingency plans discussed during °7--
stay here with: ‘one &kDE major excentions You are nov to request a pre-S2é Tee

quest fcr help from Dominica dissident “groups e
ader it essential that you contimic %o work to St .
. pave!

“2, We cons
this Line had been taut. :

ns, four work ator

sentiment ancng dissident group
Aas a Ae * roan
4 games perl’ oe - janger of disclosi ing U.S. eet .

However, We geo mst nov
with politica? assdinats {9 nnention- inne Borimicen FeneniiSs Tris 7

princinie is overriding and must prevail in dovotful situation, #owevers * _
mach you can do ta protect U.de interests within this framework of nw

most of the measures in which you ar nee
Ceetle .
@ 4. 7 i mn chet or TO ; 7
. ‘ 23 oz" e :
of qxuji)*
~ - ex thre nov zonethY
stcX0 C ouP °
ase ob aoe poo ene pro Ber" ° an yausi>
5. & son
y pt? v- . as
esared oy P aattet sesett gee! at zrset
: one 6 bs
gore © cely : .
ef to 26 LS.
e every c t spol? iam opowo® one
enmen ° enuelt? —_ 4
at 1 cove : yen . .
nove EOF ° ; ace Exon Very
st 3 gist “ avorabie to this procedure recent :
uch and eave - ne i

ears
55 :
DocId: 32423505 ‘Page 98


--- Page 99 ---
* a . : : , : res : : : RUPE i a eink oy .
oon : : . : THe WHITE gust OFFS a, | .
% : . : ia

“PBiscuss the specific centent of such a request and procedures for handling ite A

~ :
TD ayaee a

“a possible preparations should be made short of actual puzmasmson in writing of

a stened requost in advm ce of the event. Uncerlying this procedure ig the

policy that, under no circurstances, can we take the chance of a commnist
. : trie vee, . :

type takeover dn the Diminican Republic evcu if we must porn without a request.
: This last possitlity should not be discussed with the dissidents.
h, Mxrktitaterat Reference to multilateral action in record of actions rieans

open
only that furthey sanctions will be multileterai,’ and t

s

het in the case of direct '

intervention it would be preferable for fue fortes to ve ruitilateral. No

yarader broader interpretation is justified. All other [J.5. setionsseieter ff

propganca or covert activities--will be continued on a bilateral tasis.

5, Covent activities are, ag you know, very small duc to inability of” ==
‘dissidents to develop a method of receiving sunplies which will effectively | —
Neu! dissacoitate UeSe) ani failure to previde candida-es for training 4s radio

operatce o> caboteurs, Yur offer to help along these Lines--proviced they

develop capacity and effective cover--rerains opene However, xz you mst ro arr
if 3 o

Ctl
vr we, oe of > | ys : . 5 ‘
have ‘specific Inetructzons, for any specific covert actividy. At id= the presert

time we are unable ic transfer sere arms to Gissidents, Tell them that this is .

ete . .

because of our cuspicion that method of transfer nay 26 wndaseaunpecclan,

actual Sact we feel thal the transfer of arms “culd serve very Little purpose



--- Page 100 ---
and expose the United States to: great danger of wep uitiaatedisclosre-6f j23b8s

attempt. Teopetincders fhe basic po Ley is
of covert nelp, whule carefully exam ining and clearing

asible pecta’se, in agtual facty the covert help is very slight except

evchind ?
for verbal ancouracerent and Antormations

This is fe

6, We intend to Keep up anti

pPCSTEreSe
i
>In event orerthvong Tyyjitio ;
tse ‘
iervaco! it on recent of request. pen loehigttyher § provisional govenirs
fee Lonel g pie pred hee :

‘3

and your concurrence;

he eae eK any danger of commnist: tekeover “hen decision vill oe nace in

; Washington whether to S anterver regardless. This maxes
request te cottained if at all possiole, . -' ate,

8, Pegia conversations jmraciate’y with dissidents inforsdre shen of Vacs

position aad the. sonrsrbix nec seity for én juunecia te request. piosesase:

rranaes If they are favorahle to this nrocecuTe take

prepare for the immeditate tranemiticl of e.cn.a recy} ‘kot snort of the act

preparation of a writben dot sanent[Ex-se ties sents for advance transfer +> YO.

on : 7 | Cook'n

the specific help requcestede |
: \
i

we wall 37 sm, If no reques® is received and the 28k aprears: rae)

to paetihet continue te hold open offer

Trujillo prosz anda campaign and other external

militery forces wil be dispatched im. egictely |

e

pene



--- Page 101 ---
1 IG ae .  RGUTING -
nit WH3/DR&H TOP SECREY ra

» 29 MAY 2961

iadele cd

al CIUDAD IRUJLLLO (OP-RATIONAL L i: HEDIATE )
som: DIRECTOR: , ,

ont: C/WH 1-5 7
ito # DCI 6; D/Oci 7, DOP 8, coP geA00P /A.10,C/CA 11, S/C 11-12

72.94
Q TRUS (OPLI) TO? SECRET. info : a . CITE DIR
REF: TRUJ 0609 (1u 13990) =. a - Oe Se

. Officer a 7 _ Se Sd
FOR CIA/ ° FROM STATE
_-s Ag_PRESYDENT TAS 2O.! ADULOVED CONSINGSMCY pl’ PISCLSS=D DURING YOUR
STAY HERS LTH ONS ““AJOR CBMTONS YOUVE ALL GOT TU QUEST A PRE-SUGUD
‘REQUEST FOR HELP #0" Logxican DIS SADIT GROUFS, ne oo
(2 MB CONSIDRE IT 4. S4CTIAL ‘i YOU COWINUS ‘TO «OKK TO STRE NCTIEN
Prrno-u.s. SENTD:2NT ACONG iv SubewT ‘craves. YGkEe statis ALONG THIS LINE EAS BESN

‘ +

INVALUAELS. HOdEVER, We ee HOT RUN 1GSK CF iz S. ASSUCIMION wiTd POLITICAL ©
=~

“ASSASSINATION, SLICE Ue, AL MATTER oF GIMPAL POLICY CAniOT COHBONS ASSASSINATION. *
a en

“THiS LAST PRINCLPLE IS OVGRADING AND FUST PaSVAIL Li RCURIPUL SutUATLON. NOWEV A,

oe ape are

THERE 18 }UCH YOU Cat: LO 1G F LOTECT U.S, INTEASTS siHT ILS TRASEWORK OF ry

POLICY, INCLUDING 031 OF Gis NEASUIES mi wHICH yCi ARS Oi anGaGsD.  SPECLFLC Yooua

INSTRUCTIONS FOLLGY. coat os Se , ES

“3. CONTLWE 70 INFOF': DASSIDUST GLELTS OF Ue. . SUPLCRT POR THEIR
POSITION. 1N CASS OF OVSRUE2O CP TRUJLLLO--UseiseR OR HOT GuaTLaTAD EY PhO-
U.S, GROUP=-THE PRO=ILS, CRCWP QICELD TRUWTLY CART WA GFPOLT 10 COMYLTE

ITSELF AS REASONAELS ALD PLALSLbLS. -ROVILAOUAL GOVT OM. ak CHOPLE LaicDLATSLY

“DECLARE LISPLE SUCH "AND RUQBCT ASSISTANCE Ge \AY., Ts SEh SDA, GOLGDLA AUD AS, me

. . ” COORDINATING OFFICERS (CON Li =D)
é SELEASING OFFICER : AUTHENTICATING GFEFICER

| REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE IS PROHIBITED, Copy No.



--- Page 102 ---
-_ ‘4 CLASSIFIED MESSAGE ZY
: an : : : an ROUTING
- , : a an TOP SECRET

7. a2 DIRECTOR

» CONF:

INFO: | mo
a PAGE TWO

OUT.- 60694 :

0 TRU (OPIM) TOP SECRET. INFO | - ergo 42443

IF ADVANCE reseissoie SHO:/ THAT DiSSLDRITS ARE FAVORABLE TO THIS PROCEDURE, i

, DISCUSS 3 SPECIFIC CONTiT OF SUCH A REQUEST AND *ROCEDURES FOR HANDLING 17.

ALL POSSIBLE PREPAPATIONS SHOULD BE MADS SHORT OF ACTUAL FORMULATION IN WRITING '

OFA REQUEST IN ADVANCE OF THE EVENT. UNDERLYING THiS PROCEDURE IS THE POLICY

Tuan, UNDER NO CIRCUMSTANCES, CAN ‘WE TAKE THE CHANCE OF A COMMUNIST TYPE TAKEOVER , —

IN THE DOitNICAN REPUBLIC EVEN IF WE MUST INTERVENS WITHOUT A REQUEST. 7HIS a I
er ust POSSIBILITY SHOULD NOT EE DISCUSSED iJITH THE LiSSIDENTS. : :

hk. REFERENCE’ To MULTILATSRAL ACTION IN ecORD OF ACTIONS MEANS ONLY THAT

FURTHER OPEN SANCTIONS WILL BE sULTILATERAL: AND TAT IN THE CASE OF DIRECT

“INTERVENTION IT WOULD BS PRSFERAELE FOR FORCES TO Bi MULTILATERAL. NO BROADER

; INTERPRETATION is JUSTIFIED. ALL OTHER U.S. ACTLONS+-WHETHER PROPAGADA GR

COVERT activitrzs—~ WLLL BE cournxueD ON A BILATERAL EASIs, _

‘Be SOVERT ACTLVITIES AR, AS YOU I0il, VERY S: “ALL DUE TO INABILITY OF -
“DISSIDENTS 0 DEVELOP A HSHGD OF RECEIVING SUPPLLGS Wil CH WILL’ EFFECTIVELY DIS-

_ ASSOCIATE U.S., AHD FALLURE TO PHOVADE CANDIDATES FOR TRAINING AS RALLO OPERATORS
OR SAROTEURS. OUR OFFER TG HELP ALONG THESE LINES--2hOVIDED THX DEVELOP CATACLTY
AXD EFFSCT covEn--Re WAINS OPS. HOWEVER, YOU HUST sLQUSST AND PECHiVE FURTEGR

* SPOCIFLC INSTRUCTIONS FOR ALY SPECIFIC COVERT ACTLVITY. AT THE PRESET TIME WE
ARS UNABLE TO IRANSFSR-Ais.2 GO DISSIDESTS. TZLL Ti .. THAT THLS’ is BECAUSE OF

COORDINATING OFFICERS
(CQPTAN Pda rine orfices

REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE IS PROHIBITED. Copy No.

RELEASING OFFICER : : Tor

PETAL OL Ett



--- Page 103 ---
DIRECTOR

PAGS THREE

TRUJ (OPL:) TOP SECKET INFO | Joe CITE OR yauy3

OUR. SUSPICION THAT iaitilGa' Ox’ TRANSFER HAY BE UNSAPZ. IW acrtAL FACT Wk FEEL THAT
TRE TRANSFOR OF ARM: MOLLE SERVE VARY LITTLE PURPOSE AKD EXPOLS THE UNITED “STATES
20 GREAT DANGSZ, OF ASECCLATLON JATH ASSASSLNATION ATT“CPT. THE EASIC POLICY
IS TO CONTLIUE TO HOLD 0? Sf OFFIR OF COVERT HLP, #MLLE CARJFULLY BEALL
ALD CLEARS 1G WIE SPECLFIC AvL? RSQUEATED, THIS 1S FEA: ISLE EACAUSE, IN actual
FACT, THE CovenT Hebe TS Vemy LICHT EXGs?t ren VEREAL EICCURAGS: HeUT. AND EXCHANGE
OF IiFOR ‘ATION. oe . _ = ; -

6. “WE TuTEND 79 KSav UP ANTL<TRIJTLLO PROPAGAL DA CAUCAIG) AND OTHER .

EXTP ONAL PRES SITES.

To. FYI, IN SVT OVEN iGo OF TELJLLLO 14a! tAuY PORCHES WILL E& DISPATCHED
(aEDLA PLY ie OTAID-EY POOL TLORS « «ON RECA PT OF RAQUEST FROW P2OVISLONAL
SOVERNGEAT, ‘Mi D YOUR 2 CONCUATINC!, iE wih BE risraAleb Tj OG Li GOWDAATCLY. iF ;
40 ROWE “ST IS Rudy wD AL Tes aA PEDAAS TO LE AxY DATION uF COMMUNIST TAKEOVER

THEN DECLELON wiLb St HAD? au WASH TOW WLETHMR TO 20 EVs ach iUGARDLESS. THIS

tks at “Lhe RHATIVE TAT A payer kes Orta: ineD if AL ‘ALL PUSSLBLS, END FYI. — .

"8. PEGI: COMVENISATIC, ih LtDiay LY WLTH DicSaln.TS LirthaliG THE, OF U.S. _

208 LTLON AND Tis nECRES ITY fun AR. Doitcbaals 1 Reine, AP THEY ARs FAVCRALLS TG

(HLS PLOCSDUR? TAKs ALL AX Sir bs A UNS TO. NAGE 0. THE DANIDiATE TEAMS : sITTAL

vF SUCH A REQ! at SHORT OF TS ACTVAL ROPAPAY ION! C2 ny PIT: HP DCCY Lait Mn ALVANCS

COOEDINATING OFFICERS }

BELEASING OFFICER . . “aU ORTH DD OFFICER i
TOP SLC 7 Oe,
). "REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE IS PROHIBITED, | CopyNo.

05 Page 103 : , ca sewers



--- Page 104 ---
PAGE FOUR . - 7  f ouT 60694

This (OPL:t) TOP SECRET INFO BO . CITE DIR -

hakkg
TO YOU.

BND OF HESSAGE

. a ‘ : officer - . os

uH/Coment: *Ref wis messa,e from CIA/ to State in which he asked what

+ guidance and encouragenient ae could give dissidents, if he could
provide dissidents saith draft document recuest tis. /GaS assistance

“gn event TH JiLLO overtarown, and asked clarification of

President's state:.ent that any action ajainst ‘i JsLLC should be

multilateral. |

-

t -\

°§ COMMENT :*#DISSEMINATION RESTRICTED. TEXT DIRECTED TO ANOTHER U.S. GOVT.

-ORGANI ZATION. mee
. .~ tl
. att ee - : ~ -- .
C/:MD' COORDINATING OFFICERS - . vee C/.6k/3

RELEASING OFFICER AUTHENTICATING OFFICER -

rs REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE IS PROHIBITED.


