
--- Page 1 ---
JFK Assassination System Date: W7/2015

— | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 ]
Identification Form

Agency Information

AGENCY: SSCIA
RECORD NUMBER: — 157-10014-10100

5 RECORD SERIES: MISCELLANEOUS RECORDS OF THE CHURCH COMMITTTEE

\ .
“AGENCY FILENUMBER: —07-M-06

a

Document Information

ORIGINATOR: SSCIA
FROM: SCHWARZ, FREDERICK A.O. JR.
TO:

TITLE: NOTES ON GORDON GRAY

DATE: 07/04/1975

PAGES: 72
SUBJECTS :
ASSASSINATIONS
CIA
TRUJILLO

LUMUMBA, PATRICE
GRAY, GORDON

DOCUMENT TYPE: REPORT
CLASSIFICATION : — Declassified
RESTRICTIONS: = 1B; 1C
CURRENTSTATUS: — Redact
DATE OF LASTREVIEW: — 05/05/2000

OPENING CRITERIA :

COMMENTS : CCBOX 450

v9.1 1

HW 50955 Docld:32423488 Page i


--- Page 2 ---
08/06/95
1

: : JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM
i IDENTIFICATION FORM

AGENCY INFORMATION

AGENCY : SSCIA
RECORD NUMBER : 157-10014-10100 :
RECORDS SERIES : MISCELLANEOUS RECORDS OF THE CHURCH COMMITTTEE
AGENCY FILE NUMBER : 07-M-06

DOCUMENT INFORMATION

ORIGINATOR : SSCIA
FROM : SCHWARZ, FREDERICK A.O. JR.
TO :
TITLE : NOTES ON GORDON GRAY
DATE : 07/04/75
PAGES : 72
SUBJECTS : GRAY, GORDON
ASSASSINATIONS
TRUJILLO

LUMUMBA, PATRICE

CIA
DOCUMENT TYPE : REPORT
CLASSIFICATION : TOP SECRET
RESTRICTIONS : REFERRED
CURRENT STATUS : POSTPONED IN FULL
DATE OF LAST REVIEW : 01/05/99
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS : CCBOX 450

[R] - ITEM IS RESTRICTED

HW 50955 Docld:32423488 Page 2


--- Page 3 ---
GORDON GRAY



--- Page 4 ---
Tokum Buk Files

From: Frederick ae . _
Re:. Notes. on. GORDON GRAY
Date: 7/4/75 4
ROCKEFELLER COMMISSION TESTIMONY |
Page Subject
om on DRED - Biographical background
R8RBX ;
oie GRRE RN : : -
2268 Opinions on PFIAB generally :
- 2272 | Never heard of Eaecutive Action
7 2273 © “T know of no plan,plot, operational organization that”
ee _ ever came to President Eisenhower with respect #0 any.
assassinations," HHH (2272- 3)
~ “2273 In 1960, Eisenhower “approved a four point progran, xabo
a sabotage, stepped up economic sanctions, propaganda’.
and the rhe training of Cuban refugees"
2274 Where waa one wa "well known individual” on PFTAB
who would ask at each CIA briefing on Vietnam “have you
considered trying to bump off some of the feaders in Nor
Vietnam". fham@fiampmihemxwa Gray says that "Agency polic:
7 was against assassination on the ground that it didn't
accomplish anything”
2275, "I know of no (assassination) plan or operational
° capabiiity that has ever been authorized at any htgh ——
level.of government"
(2276 Rumettiwem At a meeting with Gray and a representative

of_the€té_in-1958,"the-President—toid—-me—that—he—wante:
the 54/12 gropp to pass upon all. activities of this

--gevernment—_which—_impinged—upo nt-y--o£—the——
people of some other nation....President | Eisenhower was

very-sensitive tothe necessity of -havingthe-top—people
in government from the appropriate agencies pass upon
the widdom,-and_in some cases, feasibility of thoae ——

kinds of operations."

Gray is unenthusiastic about proposal for Joint ‘Congress
_@1 goversight committee because of danger of leake

2278-9

Gray recommends creation of a "chief intelligence | office:

_ (either the DCI or a Special Aesist. to the Pres. for In

~— ERUGELLO: Gray did not recall “Ambassador. ‘“Farland's |
report in May, 1960 that dissidents in the Rom. Rep. .wan

high powered rifles with telescopic scopesx and subsequei
received authorization to provide them by the Assist. Se:

of State through the DCI.

- Gray did not yecall” special croup meetings at end of Efs:
_hower Admin. (11/29/60; 1/12/61) at. which it was _agreed—
“furnish arms to dissidénts in the Dom Rep.” ~
--"I would think our concern was, if we had that kind of

concern, was with béing of assistance to the dissidents,
and not assasssination, or that kind of activity."

HW 50955 Docld: 32423488 Page 4



--- Page 5 ---
Tokumn Kuk Files
From: Frederick Bar ,

Re: Notes on GORDON GRAY
Date: 7/4/75 .

ROCKEFELLER COMMISSION TESTIMONY

Page Subject
2262 eae 8iographical--background : - - oe ne maw
REKEX
@anax oo, .
2268 ‘Opinions on PFIAB generally
ical . _.
2272, Never heard of Executive Action’
227300 "I know of no plan,plot, opérational organization that

ever came to President Eisenhower with respect fo any |
assassinations, "XHH (2272-3)

2273 “In 1960, Eisenhower “approved a four point program, sabme
sabotage, stepped up economic Sanctions, propaganda,
and the tke training of Cuban refugeas'

2274 There was one wz "well known individual" on PFIAB

who would ask at each CIA briefing on Vietnam "have you a

considered trying to bump off some of the leaders in North ,

Vietnam", Rhum iakmanthemxws Gray says that "Agency policy

was against assassination on the ground that it didn't™ > >

accomplish anything",

2275 "IT know of no (assassination) plan or operational
capability that has ever been authorized at any high
level of government"

2276 Rmugminem At a meeting with Gray and a representative

government which impinged upon the Sovereignty or. the ...-
people of some other nation....President Eisenhower was”

2278-9 Gray is unenthusiastic about Proposal for Joint Congression
al goversight committee because of danger of leake

2281 Gray recommends creation of a "chief intelligence officer" o
(either the DCI or a Special Assist. to the Pres. for Int.)
2292 E FRUSELLO: Gray did not recall Ambassador Farland's _
report in May,
high powered ri

2293 — Gray did not recall Special Group meetings at end of Eisen-
hower Admin, (11/29/60; 1/12/61) at which it was agreed to
furnish arms to dissidents in the Dom.Rep, “
~-"I would think our concern was, if we had that kind of

’ concern, was with being of assistance to the dissidents,
and not assasssination, or that kind of activity.” ;

4

HW 50955. DocTd: 32423488 Page 5 _.


--- Page 6 ---
Tokux Ruk Files
“From: Frederick Bai 4

Re: Notes on GORDON CRAY
Date: 7/4/75

ROCKEFELLER COMMISSION TESTIMONY

Page Subject

2262. - B8lographical background

RRERX

a8nax — ;

2268 Opinions on PFIAB generally

2272 Never heard of Executive Action :
2273 "I know of no plan,plot, operational organization that

ee ever came to President Eisenhower with respect 4&0 any __ _
assassinations," HHH (2272~3)
2273 ; In 1960, Eisenhower “approved a four point Program, smbat
sabotage, Stepped up economic Sanctions, Propaganda,
and the tke training of Cuban refugees"

2274 There was one we "well known individual” on PFIAB

who would ask at each CIA briefing on Vietnam "have you

considered trying to bump off some of the leaders in North

\ Vietnam", tham@didmaninhenxwa Gray says that "Agency policy
was against assassination on the Sround that it didn't™ --
accomplish anything",

2275 "I know of -no (assassination) plan or operational
‘capability that has ever been authorized at any high
level of government"

2276 2mzeinem At a meeting with Gray and a representative .
: . of the CIA in 1958, "the President told me that he wanted-.™

the widdom, and in some cases, feasibility of those
kinds of operations." . ;

2278-9 Gray is unenthusiastic about proposal for Joint Congression
al Eoversight committee because of danger of leake

2281 Gray recommends creation of a "chief intelligence officer" -
(either the DCI or a Special Assist. to the Pres. for Int.)

2292 K FRUSELLO: “Gray did not recall Ambassador Farland's
report. in May, 1960 that dissidents in the Bom. Rep.
high powered rifles with telescopic scopesx and
received authorization to provide them by the As
of State through the DCI.

2293 : Gray did not recall Special Group meetings at end of Eisen-
hower Admin. (11/29/60; 1/12/61) at which it was agreed to
furnish arms to dissidents in the Dom.Rep. sO
~-"I would think our concern was, if we had that kind of
concern, was with being of assistance to the dissidents,
and not assasssination, or that kind of activity.”

HW 50955 Docld: 32423488 Page 6


--- Page 7 ---
These documents-were pulled from a
Spécial Group file by John Bayly.
They should be replaced after we
xerox those minutes we intend to |
use as exhibits for the Gray testimony.

Ntrhd mwPQ 1 copy
4 (1A Peme
A4 bn eh bF

sas

Docldf’32423488 Page 7

HW 50955


--- Page 8 ---
Biographical Background

"1942-1947

1949-1950
1950-1951
1951
1951-1955
1955

1958
‘1958-1961

1961-1975

: GORDON GRAY

Chronolo

U.S. Army (Private to Captain) ,

Department of Army (ultimately Secretary
of the Army)

Special Assistant to President TRUMAN

Organized for TRUMAN the Psychological
Strategy Board, which involved close

contact with intelligence community

' President, University of North Carolina

Assistant Secretary of Defense for
International Security Affairs (ISA)

Director, Office of Defense Mobilization

SPECIAL ASSISTANT TO THE PRESIDENT (EISENHOWER)
FOR NATIONAL SECURITY AFFAIRS (Head of NSC)

Member, PFIAB (President's Foreign Intelli-
gence Advisory Board) appointed by JFK

3

Chronology of Events

1959

November 4

, mitters. GRAY said "he was sure (the project

Special Group discusses Allen DULLES' "Cuba
Propaganda Project" for use of radio trans-

would meet with high level approval" provided
it was acceptable to the President of Mexico.
QA .

far ree ck

and Issues

“Issues and Questions

GRAY represents President EISENHOWER
at Special Group meetings.

-HW 50955 DocId¥32423488 Page 8


--- Page 9 ---
1960 (Cont'd)

February 12

February 17

March 9

March 14

April 7

TOP SECRET

A “special" NSC meeting was held on this’ day:
The only record of this meeting in the NSC
minutes states: "On instructions from the ;
Executive Secretary no memorandum was written."
(NSC Minutes) : :

Special Group approves evaluation of agents

for Cuban sugar mill sabotage. GRAY "discussed
this matter with his associate" (Eisenhower)
and reported two tactical objections.

(SG Minutes)

GRAY tells Special Group that any covert- action
like sugar mill sabotage should be undertaken
only after overall consideration of "whether
and how the U.S. wishes to move against CASTRO."
(SG Minutes)

At an NSC meeting, Allen DULLES “reported that

a plan to affect the situation in Cuba was being
worked on. Admiral BURKE suggested that any
lan for the removal of Cuban leaders should be
a package deal, since many of the leaders around
CASTRO were even worse than CASTRO." (NSC Minutes)

At a Special Group meeting, after a paper
titled "General Covert Action Plan for Cuba"
was read, there was "a general discussion as
to what would be the effect on the Cuban

scene if FIDEL and RAUL CASTRO and CHE GUEVARA
should disappear simultaneously." (SG Minutes)

"GRAY asked the [Special] Group's views on what
happens after TRUJILLO, specifically how CASTRO

ean be kept out of the Dominican Republic."

Acting DCI CABELL recommends U.S. military, inter-
vention after TRUJILLO departs. (SG Minutes)

Issues and Questions

Why were no minutes written?

Does context show that phrase "his |
associate" refers to President
EISENHOWER?

Did such consideration involve
assassination plotting?

Was this "package deal" the simultaneous
triple assassination plot that was
mentioned on November 3, 1960?

Does this simultaneous disappearance
plan refer to assassination planning?

Is there a connection between this
Special Group discussion and the NSC
discussion on March 14, 1960, re a plan
to remove Cuban leaders?

Did U.S. support TRUJILLO'S opponents out
of a desire to keep CASTRO out of the
Dominican Republic? |

32423488 Page 9

HW 50955 DocId


--- Page 10 ---
1960 (cont'd)

April 14

- April 14

June 30

July 1

July 5.

Issues and Questions

At an NSC meeting presided over by Vice President
NIXON, Allen DULLES reported "TRUJILLO'S position
continued to weaken and was now quite precarious. . .
{he] thought further attempts will be made to kill
or oust TRUJILLO." Under Secretary of State :
DILLON said “if TRUJILLO could be removed from DILLON'S comment indicates that the U.S.
power in the Dominican Republic while pro-CASTRO . had an active interest in removing TRUJILL(
elements were prevented from seizing power . :
in that country, our anti-CASTRO campaign
throughout Latin America would receive a
great boost. The Vice President agreed that
etting rid of TRUJILLO would be a favorable
development for us." (NSC Minutes)

Were these U.S. attempts to kill TRUJILLO?

Allen DULLES predicted at an NSC meeting, that Does this show that assassination was not
one ‘possible outcome with respect to CASTRO . a favored alternative because it would
was an assassination that would make CASTRO produce martyrdom?

a martyr. (NSC Minutes)

GRAY says "the U.S. has taken publicly about General atmosphere of vehement opposition

all that it can afford to take from the to CASTRO.

CASTRO government." ‘(SG Minutes)

Memo from the Chief of CIA's Western Hemis— , Was the Special Group aware of this action
phere Division to the Acting DCI recommending . Was the President aware of the plan?
delivery of high-powered rifles with telescopic Purpose of weapons?

scopes to the opponents of TRUJILLO. The

memo said: “approval for delivery of these

arms has been given by ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF
STATE ROY RUBOTTOM."

President EISENHOWER met with Secretary of
State HERTER and others to discuss the

Dominican Republic. "The President thou nt
we should knock out of any documents on file
any reference to starting a revolution,
(Conference Memorandum

What did NIXON mean by "getting TRUJILLO"? .

DocId!32423488 Page 10

*

HW 50955


--- Page 11 ---
1960 (cont'd)

July 7

July 21

Allen DULLES reported to the NSC that the
Venezuelan government wants, the United States

to lead the way in breaking relations with
TRUJILLO. DULLES stated: The Venezuelan
government was engaged in an all-out effort,
through the OAS and otherwise, to isolate, .
condemn and cause the downfall of TRUJILLO. . . .
[Because] they have convincing evidence that
TRUJILLO was responsible for the assassination
attempt on BETANCOURT [President of Venezuela
~, . BETANCOURT believes another attempt will
be made momentarily and therefore it [his
government] wants a showdown without delay."
(NSC Minutes)

"My, DULLES stated that he believes, and. the
intelligence community agrees, that the
problem of TRUJILLO must be settled before the
problem of CASTRO can be dealt with, even
though CASTRO is the greater threat."

(NSC Minutes)

The NSC Minutes further state that BETANCOURT
was told that the U.S. cannot act without
ascertaining TRUJILLO'S successor. The U.S.
will work with BETANCOURT and FIGUERES of .
Costa Rica on suggestions for a successor to
TRUJILLO. President EISENHOWER suggested that
a government in exile should be ready to go
into the Dominican Republic in the event of
TRUJILLO'S downfall. (NSC Minutes)

GRAY said "his associates" would favor the

‘development of sabotage operations in CUBA.

(SG Minutes)

Issues and Questions

‘The U.S..was under pressure to move

against TRUJILLO.

Did TRUJILLO'S attempt against BETANCOURT
make him “fair game" for assassination in
the eyes of OAS nations including the U.S.

Did the U.S. determine a successor?
Did the U.S. “act"?.

732423488 Page 11

¥

"Associate" is the euphemism for Bisen-

hower.
Does sabotage imply the further steps
of assassination?

HW 50955 DoclId


--- Page 12 ---
Ae mnepeerem

1960 (cont'd)

‘July 28

August 12

August 16

August 25

August
(approx)

Issues and Questions

President EISENHOWER stated at an NSC meeting:

our Latin American friends to reach a proper :
level of indignation in dealing with CASTRO.”

In this regard, "the President said if we

attempted to take any action with respect to

Cuba before settling the TRUJILLO situation,

we would be the loser." (NSC Minutes)

BISSELL outlines 13.3 million dollar budget

for Cuban operations which was to be laid
before "higher authorities" for decision.
(SG Minutes) ;

Dr. Edward GUNN (CIA Office of Medical . Were EISENHOWER, GRAY, or DCI DULLES
Services) receives box of Cuban cigars to aware of this?

pe treated with lethal poison for use against - ;

CASTRO. (IG REPORT p. 21)

After the Special Group approved anti-LUMUMBA : Is this circumlocutious order for
operations in the Congo, "GRAY commented, assassination from the President? An
however, that his associates had expressed indication that at the least, assassina-~
tion was within the range of acceptable
means for "getting rid of LUMUMBA"?

and he wondered whether the plans as outlined
would be sufficient to accomplish this ... . It
was finally agreed that planning for the Congo
would not necessarily rule out ‘consideration'

might contribute to getting rid of LUMUMBA."
SG Minutes; emphasis added

g .
Docld?32423486 Page 12.

At the NSC meeting, Mr. STANS ‘suggested that
the U.S. might "throw out LUMUMBA by peaceful .
means." (NSC Minutes) _ .

BISSELL asks EDWARDS to find underworld contacts ‘ Were EISENHOWER , GRAY, or Allen DULLES
with Cuba to aid in an assassination operation aware of this? Was it authorized by

HW 50955


--- Page 13 ---
1960 (cont'd

‘September 8

September 21

‘October 2h

va

November 3

During brief discussion of CONGO developments,
“GRAY said that he hoped that Agency people in
the field are fully aware of the top-level

feeling in Washington that vigorous action would

not be amiss." (SG Minutes; emphasis added)

Allen DULLES stated at an NSC meeting that

"“LUMUMBA was not disposed of and remained a
reat danger as long as he was not dis osed
of." (HSC Minutes

At an NSC meeting, Allen DULLES reported
that "five Congolese soldiers had attempted
to assassinate MOBUTO on the 15th of.
October. The U.S. had prior information
of this attempt and had warned MOBUTO . . .
(NSC Minutes)

At a Special Group meeting, Mr. MERCHANT
"asked whether any real planning has been done
in taking direct positive action against FIDEL
RAUL and CHE GUEVARA. He said that without
these three the Cuban government would be
leaderless and probably brainless. He conceded
that it would be necessary to act against all
three simultaneously."

’

The minutes further state: "General CABELL
pointed out that action of this kind is
uncertain of results and highly dangerous
in conception and execution, because the
instruments must be Cuban. He felt that,
particularly because of the necessity of
simultaneous action, it would have to be
concluded that Mr. MERCHANT'S suggestion is
beyond our capabilities." (SG Minutes)

Issues and Questions

Against LUMUMBA personally?

Did the NSC contemplate “disposing of”
LUMUMBA by assassination?

. Did. this information prompt the U.S.

to plot the assassination of LUMUMBA
in retaliation or to protect MOBUTO?

Was MERCHANT referring to an assassina-
tion of Cuban leaders?

Bage 13

Shortly before this, CIA had made the
assassination contract with the Mafia.
Was General CABELL unaware of this CIA
contract? Was General CABELL expressing ™
a traditional CIA objection to assassina-
tion proposals? If so, on what other
occasion did Mr. GRAY hear the CIA
objection?

Docld ¥32423488

HW 50955


--- Page 14 ---
1960 (cont'd)

December 29

1961.

January 12

Late Jan.-
Early Feb.

At a Special Group meeting, Mr. BISSELL gave
the broad outlines of a two-pronged plan
for proceeding with certain limited covent

_activities directed against the TRUJILLO

regime, but "he also emphasized that the
roposed actions would not of themselves
bring about the desired result in the near
future, lacki some decisive stroke against
TRUJILLO himself." (SG Minutes Source:
Minutes, December 29, 1960, by T. Parrott,
of Special Group Meeting, December 29, 1960,
02752)

Special Group approves the State Department

proposal explained by MERCHANT "that limited
supplies of small arms and other material
should be made available for dissidents inside
the DOMINICAN REPUBLIC." (SG Minutes;
emphasis added)

DDP BISSELL asks William HARVEY to establish
an EXECUTIVE ACTION capability under project

. ZRRIFLE. HARVEY'S notes are quoted as saying

that BISSELL said he had been "twice urged by

the White House" to establish such a

capability,. including the capability to assassina-
ate political leaders.

issues and Questions

TRUJILLO was assassinated on May 30,
1961.

Did Mr. BISSELL or the Special Group

propose to approve aiding Dominicans

who might assassinate TRUJILLO to

effect such a "decisive stroke"? oe

Were these assassination-type weapons?

If not, was this Special Group action ~
used as implicit authority for sub-

“sequent provision of weapons for the.

assassination of TRUJILLO?

Was the EXECUTIVE ACTION project initiated
or authorized during the EISENHOWER Adminis
tration?

AW 50955 Docla?32423468 Page 14


--- Page 15 ---
GORDON GRAY: Short Summary

Gordon Gray was Special Assistant to the President for National Security
Affairs from 1958-1961. During this period Gray represented President
EISENHOWER at Special Group meetings at which the following subjects
swere discussed: "any particular kind of activity which might contribute
. to getting rid of LUMUMBA"; provision of small arms to opponents to
TRUJILLO in the Dominican Republic; and detailed planning for “how the
U. S. wishes to move against CASTRO"

Gray' s testimony should involve the following questions (see attached
list of exhibits) :

_ CASTRO

1. What was Admiral Burke referring to at the March 14, 1960, NSC meet-
ing when he spoke of "a plan for the removal of Cuban leaders should
be a package deal"? (Exhibit at Tab EB)

2. Is there a connection between the plan referred to by Admiral Burke:
at the March 14 NSC meeting and the discussion at the March 14
Special Group meeting on the "effect on the Cuban scene if Fidel and
Raoul Castro and Che Guevara should disappear simultaneously"?.
(Exhibit at Tab F) .

3. Were President Eisenhower or Mr. Gray aware that on August 16, 1960,
the CIA Office of Medical Services received a box of Cuban cigars to
be treated with poison for use against Castro? (Exhibit at Tab 0)

4, Were President Eisenhower or Mr. Gray aware that in August 1960
Bissell asked Edwards to find underworld contacts with Cuba for an
assassination mission? (Exhibit at Tab R)

5. At the November 3, 1960, Special Group meeting, was Mr. Merchant
referring to planning for assassination when he asked whether plan~
ning had been done "in taking direct positive action against Fidel,
Raoul, and Che Guevara"? How does General Cabell's response (that
Merchant's suggestion “is beyond our capabilities") square with the
fact that shortly before November 1960 the CIA had made contact with
the Mafia for a Castro assassination effort? (Exhibit at Tab V)

TRUJILLO
1. Was Vice President Nixon referring to assassination.at the April 14,

1960, NSC meeting when he said "getting rid of Trujillo would be a
favorable development"? (Exhibit at Tab H)

HW 50955 Docld: 32423436 Page. 15 -


--- Page 16 ---
=a : -2-

2. Was the Special Group, Mr. Gray, or President Eisenhower aware that
Assistant Secretary of State Rubottom was reported, on July 1, 1960,
by the CIA Western Hemisphere Division Chief to have approved delivery
of high-powered rifles with telescopic sights to Trujillo Opponents?
(Exhibit at Tab YZ)

3. when President Eisenhower was reported at the July 28, 1960, NSC meet~
ing to have said that "until Trujillo is eliminated . . .", was he
referring to an assassination? (Exhibit at Tab M)

4. On January 12, 1961, the Special Group approved making available
."small arms" to dissidents in the Dominican Republic. Were these
assassination-type weapons such as the rifles with telescopic sights
‘referred to in Exhibit at Tab YZ? (Exhibit at Tab X re January 12
meeting) :

5. Did the attempts by Trujillo to assassinate President Betancourt of -
Venezuela prompt the Special Group to favor supplying arms to Dominican
dissidents who might try to assassinate Trujillo? (Exhibit at Tab K)

LUMUMBA

1. When Mr. Gray commented at the August 25, 1960, Special Group meeting
that "his associates had expressed extremely strong feelings on the
necessity for very straight-forward action", was he referring to
assassination? Do Mr. Dulles' reservations indicate that he was
objecting to a suggested assassination? (Exhibit at Tab P)

2. When Mr. Gray said at the Special Group meeting on September 8, 1960,
that "he hoped that agency people in the field are fully aware of the
top level feeling in Washington that vigorous action would not be
amiss", was he referring to assassination of Lumumba? (Exhibit at
Tab S) _ ,

COMMAND and CONTROL

What was the conmand and control system for covert action operations
in the Eisenhower Administration?

Pertinent Relationships

President Eisenhower Gray was the President's liaison to the
: intelligence community and the National
Security Council (including the Special

Group).
DCI Allen Dulles. Gray met with Dulles in the Special Group.
DDP Richard Bissell - _.. Gray knew Bissell well. Bissell initiated

the CIA-Gambling Syndicate plot to assassinate
Castro and the Executive Action capability.

FB/RKK
7/8/75

BW 50955 Docld: 3242348. Page 16


--- Page 17 ---
TO: Frita Schwarz and Curt Smothers SECRET
FROM: Frederick Baron -
' DATE: July 6, 1975

GORDON GRAY: SHORT SUMMARY

Gordon Gray was Special Assistant to the President for Natonal Security

Affairs from 1958-61. During this period Gray represented President EISENHOWER
at Special Group meetings at which the following subjects were discussed:

“any particular kind of activity which might contribute to getting rid of
LUMUMBA;'' provision of small arms to opponents of TRUJILLO in the Dominican
Republic; and detailed planning for "how the U.S. wishes to move against CASTRO"

Gray's testimony should involve the following questions:

- Did any of the Special Group meetings implicitly or
explicitly contemplate or plan assassination attempts
against LUMUMBA, TRUJILLO, or CASTRO?

- ‘To what extent were CIA plans against these leaders .
authorized by or made known to President EISENHOWER, ;
Gordon GRAY, DCI Allen DULLES, or the Special Group as a whole?

- What were the general command § control practices?

Questioning of Gray should focus upon the following documents:

- Special Group Minutes, November 3, 1960.

- Special Group Minutes, August 25, 1960.

-. Memorandum of July 1, 1960 from J. C. King, Chief, Western Hemisphere
Division: to the Acting DCT.

- Minutes of the Special Group of January 12, 1961.

PERTINENT RELATIONSHIPS

President Eisenhower , Gray was the President's liaison to the
. ; intelligence commmity and the National
Security Council (including the Special Group).

DCI Allen Dulles , Gray met with Dulles in the Special Group.

DDP Richard Bissell Gray knew Bissell well. Bissell initiated the |
CIA-Gambling Syndicate plot to assassinate CASTRO
and the EXECUTIVE ACTION capability. —

President Truman Gray was Secretary of the Amy and
. Special Assistant to the President

Livingston Merchant. Undersecretary of State for Political Affairs

representing the State Department at Special
Group meetings. ,

H¥ 50955 DocId: 32423488 Page 17


--- Page 18 ---
EXHIBITS FOR THE EXAMINATION OF GORDON GRAY

Castro*
Special Group Minutes, November 3, 1960.

‘Special Group Minutes, August 12, 1960.

Lumumba ~
Special Group Minutes, August 25, 1960.

Special Group Minutes, September 8, 1960.

Trujillo ©

Memorandum of July 1, 1960 from J. C. King, Chief,
Western Hemisphere Division to the Acting DCI.

Minutes of the Special Group of December 29, 1960.
Minutes of the Special Group of January 12, 1961.

HW 50955 DocId: 32423488 Page 18


--- Page 19 ---
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RE

et ee wy)

3 November 1960 ¢-5

CORD

SUBJECT: Minutes of Special Group Meeting, 3 November 1960

PRESENT: Messrs. Merchant, Nougias, Gray, Gen. Cabell,

Gen. Lansdale

My /

1, . Cuba : _

Mr. Gray inquired once

more as to the status of planning for

problems which would arise post-Castro. Mr. Merchant said’he

would check into the progress

of the State Department group which

“has been charged with developing yecommendations on this matter.

From this the Group launched into a far-ranging discussion of
the entire concept of U.S. efforts against Castro. Mr. Douglas,
supported by Mr. Gray and Mr. Merchant, expounded the idea that ©
perhaps things have now progressed toa point where covert activities

of the type originally envisage
Mr. Douglas referred to the e
cited the matter of arms from

d for CLA to undertake will not be effective.
xtensive program of the militia, Mr. Gray
the Soviet bloc, and Mr. Merchant dwelt

on the increasing effectiveness of Castro's measures to control the
population in ways which the Communists have developed so weil. The’
latter said that he and others in the State Department had originally

thought that a popular rebellio

pn would develop within Cuba and that

this could be augmented by the comparatively small-scale efforts of
exiles under CIA control. Now the same people are beginning to feel

more and more that despite th

e numerous defections and the economic

deprivations being experienced by the middle and upper classes, time

is actually working on Castro!

s side. Mr. Merchant said that he

foresaw that there would occur 4 point in time beyond which covert

intervention would not do the Jj

Mr. Gray expressed the

ob. ore

opinion that we will never be able to

Nelean up" the situation without the use of overt U.S. military force.
He suggested the possibility of using the CIA-backed exiles to-mount a
simulated attack on Guantanamo in order to offer an excuse for overt”

PROPERTY
HE WHITE HOUSE & FU0f

HW 50955 DocId: 32423488 Page 19°

ee EA NAP Hoes


--- Page 20 ---
Wucuiad “ Wi wand

intervention. This led to an involved discussion, the general conclusion
of which was that Such action on our Part would not be desirable, but

understood by responsible officials, so that any overt Cuban act would
be met with a previously-agreed-on response,

._ Mr. Merchant stated thar, apart from any attack on Guantanamo,
he thought that some of the previous argumentation in today's meeting
_ Was faulty, in that we could not have it both ways. By this he meant
that itis not logical to conclude ‘that an indigenous uprising is impossible
and yet that it is feasible for the U.S. to goin overtly and "clean up
the mess." He pointed out that if Castrots Support were such that an

‘Turning to the immediate problem before the Group, Gen. Cabell
outlined the’ general Proposal to establish bases in the U.S., with the ~
reasons for coming to this conclusion. He cited specifically the
possibility of U.N, investigation in Guatemala and the increased scope
of the Program, which has been brought about by the increased Strength
of the Castro regime. All members of the Group expressed serious
doubts as to whether such activity could be kept at all secure, Mr...
Merchant said at one point, that although this does not represent a
final conclusion on his part, he is inclined to think that the proposal
embodies the worst aspect of both worlds; that is, the choice should
rest between continuing our operations entirely on foreign soil o+

Mr, Gray suggested that the decision could be put up to his
associates at the same time Tibet is discussed. Mr, Merchant agreed
that this is where it should end up, but asserted that he is not prepared
to move in that direction until a survey has been made of the possibilities
of keeping operations in the U.S, unrevealed,

CEO PTT fT ey PROPER To
baeel MELD NEY ype WHITE Hous. go

7 —s . , ‘ : . : ,
HW 50955 DocId: 32423488 Page. 20


--- Page 21 ---
Mr. Douglas said that in any cage he would be prepared to have ‘
the Department of Defense investigate the availability of specific ;
locations that would be suitable. : |

2 . ;
i
‘

Finally, Mr. Merchant asked whether any real planning has been i,
done for taking direct positive action against Fidel, Raul and Che Guevara. /”
“He said that without these three the Cuban Government would be J.
leaderless and probably brainless. He conceded that it would be va v4
necessary to act against all three Simultaneously. Gen. Cabell pointed _ / |
out that action of this kind is uncertain of results and highly dangerous ;
in conception and execution, because the instruments must be Cubans. :
He felt that, particularly because of the necessity of simultaneous : i
action, it would have to be concluded that Mr. Merchant's suggestion i -

ie hevand oenr canahilities.

7 . 4

alae

eamry PTA ay PROPERTY at
SET. PTR 4 You
fpct cd Ga THE WHITE HOUSE Ui Feut

HW 50955 Docld:32423488 Page 21 —


--- Page 22 ---
‘bad wt ka din Lt

ww 4, Supply Drops - Cuba

Gen. Cabell explained that the Pinar de Rio supply mission had
not taken place because of the absence of specified communication
from the DZ, and the Escambray operation had been canceled because

‘of weather. He said that these missions are still planned, and assumed ———
_that the Group had no objections. The members 50 signified,

“5, U-2, Cuba

Gen. Cabell said that the photographic coverage on the first
flight had been only about 50%, because of cloud cover. He continued
that we are analyzing the exact results ona priority basis and that
some time after the middle of next week we should be in a position to
make recommendations for the missions required to extend the coverage.

Mr. Gray commented somewhat wryly that this was all right with
him since he "would certainly not-be available to discuss anything of
this kind before the middle of next week." The other members appeared
to have the same reaction. ; : ; :

6, Policy Consideration Re Cuban Exiles . ; a

Mr. Gray said that Assistant Attorney General Yeagley had spoken
to him after his meeting with Col. King and Messrs. Esterline and
Holman. He had said that the information given to him by the CIA
representatives, and the arrangements for future coordination if
necessary, were entirely satisfactory to him. He had stated, however,
that a problem remains with respect to action the FBI should take; -
that is, the FBI needs guidance in its handling of Cuban exile groups
other than those under the direction of CIA..

The Group agreed that the best way to attack this problem would
be to have Mr. Yeagley attend next week's Special Group meeting and
discuss the matter at firsthand. Mr. Parrott was asked to make
arrangements for this. ;

J 7. Value of Cuba to the USSR as a Base Vis-a-vis
Gape Canaveral ; ;

Mr. Parrott gave Mr. Merchant the gist of the OSI memorandum

QrOREy _ Perg pny
ila Tu SA ba

HW 50955 Docld:32423486 Page 22 —-


--- Page 23 ---
on this subject,

which kad been discussed with the rest of the Group

- on 20 October 1960.

Ya Renu,

THOMAS A. PARROTT

OMTY
bog des trib Wats tye

HW 50955 Docld:32423488 Page 23

“—



--- Page 24 ---
EYES OuLY

12 August 1960

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Minutes of Special Group Meeting - 11 August 1960

PRESENT:. Messrs, Merchant, Gray, Dulles, and Bissell

aso ‘Sr one k ioe a
Caray} ma .)
Te a j - i) Le av

, i
. \ .
is Vase

“ "2, Budget for Cuban Ovecrations: Mr. Bissell summarized the.
budget which had been prepared as a basis for seeking a release trom the
Reserve to finance Cuban operations for the balance of the fiscal year,
The budget for the year totals approximately thirteen and a quarter rnillion
dollars, not including provision for the replacernent of material with an
estimated value of 1,6 million dollars to be withdrawn from Agency -
inventory. Since 2,5 million dollars of budgeted and Reserve funds. have
been made available for this program by an earlier action, the balance
required is about ten and three-quarters million dollars. Mr, Dulles”
stated that a release of ten million would ve requested at this time since
there is inevitably a wide margin of uncertainty as to what the actual costs
will: turn out to be. Mr. Bissell stated the amounts required by major _
sub-headings as follows:. ;

Political Action ! $ 960, 000,00

Propaganda _ 2,152,120,00
Paramilitary . 8,055,753,00
Intelligence Collection . 833,200,00
Counter Intelligence 325, 400,00
Communications Support 229, 420,00
Support 731,718,00 —

_
$ 13,287,611.00 Total -

PROPLE TS bo Senin at
THE WHITE HOUSE UFFICE EYES GLY

oe

SEGRET

_ ah.

‘HW 50955 DocId:32423488 Page 24


--- Page 25 ---
ne
i
;

It was agreed that the operations in question must go forward and that
the amount did not seem unreasonable for activities of this scope and
scale but it was understood that Messrs. Merchant and Gray could not
state that they had reviewed in any detail the manner in which the
estimates had been arrived at, Following further discussion, it was _

" agreed that this matter should be laid before the appropriate higher ,
authorities and a presentation would be arranged hopefully within the
next ten days, This was believed to be wise, not because any actions”
involving major political risks were to be taken in the near future, but
because the Agency would soon become committed to various substantial
expenditures which should not be undertaken without reasonable assurance
that the operation was to go forward.

“f-

ete 4 Ne
1 .
: . RICHARD M, BISSELL, JR. :

Deputy Director
(Plans)

ES uLY
Sen

HW 50955 DocId:32423488 ‘Page 25 ve



--- Page 26 ---
.

HIRED PORT Acting Director of Central Intelligence
VIAs  Beputy Director (isn)

SUBLETS - . Olandestine Dolivery of trea to Oppoaktdon Loaderentp ;
dn tho Dominican Republic.

e

Ve: This mexorerdisy raco-monda action by the Acting Director of
Central Intelligence. ouch rocoumcdation de contained in para 5,

2. ‘hilo istaasador Varlend was in the Omainican Hepublic, a prin
cipal leator of the onseeition requested thet a lisdted mmtor of ares ba
made available waich could ba used to rreaipatato tee overthrow of tho
reging of Coreral iaveel leonidses irujills. jihese atms presusably would
‘be “used aguinat say renbera of the trujitlo regingde

Within recent tontha, the Tmijillo rerine hee tecons tnerensinaly
unistobla due to prowling opposition within tho professional end riddle
. Glassoa to the exceases of tho dictatorahio. #olitical oprrension of
thoze groups hea brow:ht about suverely strained relations bstweon the
Catholic Church and the Trujillo reqize. Host knowlaigoable saurcea have
been prodiating that the frll of the regino iv dmincnt. —

Sineo the fall of the Trujillo verize unosre inevitablo, da to the
_ intercat of tha Uo. that our relations with the oppositicn be ag close
en pomalhia, rroviding the arma as requested would contriiate olgnifi-
cently tovard this end.

3. It $s proposed to procive and deliver to wundargrourml opposition

forces in thea Doninican fepublic twelve (12) sterile Ueoe rifles, iedel
' 1903 (Springfield), with teleacsnde sishts, together with five hundred

(500) rounds of cumunition for case. “rms ond axcunition aro inmodiately
available at HOss2i dssoty approxinate cost fo 22705. It is planned to
doliver those veapana by air throurh bv) fectlities provided errancgosents: —
can be vorxed out vith the opposition for thoir recestion. Lf they cannat
be delivered by air, pisne ore currently boing stiniied dn the Oa staff for

delivery by cea. ‘
4. Approval for dolivery of thess ores has boon given by Assistent i/
Socrotary of Stato doy Rubottom, who requerts that the arms be placed fa /’
the hands of tho opposition ot the carliast pasaible nozent. ( :
OBES. © pROPER EY at

bate eae
: THE waite House 0 or fic:

x

SECRET

HW 50955 Docld: 32423488 Paye"26 -


--- Page 27 ---
oe . - Ob Chie
se a ae, Togs Gyo 7

5. It ia reeemonded that the opposition in the Doatnican Pepablic
be provided the arna as requestcde

' 4
+ Bromp

‘  thter 7
: Western Lemtcchere Divialos

oat DDCT
CQicwe
Deputy oLrostor ‘Date the recommendation contained dn
_ (lana) ; paragraph 5 da approveds
; c Hal) ,
Divestor of Gentral intellyence
Date 2 JUL jason
DDP/ = ake (1 July 60)
Distributions .
Orig & 1 - Addressee

1 — DDI

1 — DDP

1 ~ CaPs

1 - C/mp

Fi Br
THE WITT HOUSE OFFICE
nr L Oma
a4 _ :
aan
’ ., ) . e

HW 50955 Docld:32423488 Page“ 27 =~


--- Page 28 ---
_ 29 December 1960

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
‘SUBJECT: _ Minutes of Special Group Meeting, 29 December 1960

PRESENT: Messrs, Merchant, Douglas, Gray, Dulles, Bissell

ee ee cee ne cob

y .
3, Air Drops - Cuba

Mr. Bissell notified the Group of plans for five supply drops in
the next three days. |

’ .
‘5. Dominican Republic ee ; So ee
Mr. Bissell gave the broad outlines of a two-pronged plan for
proceeding with certain limited covert activities directed against the
Trujillo regime. He emphasized that although support would be given
to the Figueres group, there is no intention of establishing a para-
military force as such, since this would be impractical in view of
_ requirements for Cuba. He also emphasized that the proposed actions
would not of themselves bring about the desired result in the near future,
lacking some decisive stroke against Trujillo himself.

The Group agreed with the proposal as outlined and felt that it oo oe
should be mentioned at the Tuesday meeting. It was noted that -
‘Mr. Pawley feels that overt intervention in the Dominican Republic
should be mounted simultaneously with the Cuban operation. The
consensus of the Group was that this would not be entirely consistent,
However, it was agreed that the plan is worth beginning at this time
no matter what the eventual decision on overt intervention may be.

~6. Cuba
Mr. Merchant reported a brief conversation he had had with °
Mr. Gray's associates this morning. The latter had made two points:
(a) it would be desirable to obtain the cooperation and support of
individual Latin American governments, (b) it would be desirable, if
possible, for the U. S. to break relations with Cuba, in concert with
‘ other countries, some time before January 20th.
eon
2 PROPERTY 4:
THE WHITE Hous

Lote,

a | | SEPRET SFE Cy

HW 50955 Docld: 32423463 "page 26


--- Page 29 ---
- ; mo : dea eae ee

12 January 1961

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

: SUBJECT: Minutes of Special ‘Group Meeting, 12 January 1961

PRESENT: Messr3e Merchant, Gray; Trewin, Dulles. wa:

ry

w 3. Delegation from the Cuban Democratic Revolutionary Front

Mr. Dulles reported the information received from General

Goodpaster to the effect that a large delegation from the above-mentioned

group reportedly, will visit Washington on Saturday. ”

. / . ° .
uv v5, Contingency Plansing for Cuba. .
. Mr. Willauer outlined a proposal to establish a task force
of State, CIA, Defense and the Joint Staff

consisting of representatives
ossible eventual use of

to draw up contingency plans covering the p
overt U.S. forces. :

that such planning is an essential step.

. All members agreed
ort of the task force be available

Mx. Gray asked that a preliminary Tep
for the meeting of January ‘19th. ,

¢

» / 7. Capture of Supplies in Cuba ~
Barnes gave details of the Cuban
e cache.

uestion, Mr.-
two airdrops plus on

In answer toaq

government's capture of materiel from
oo } . : mS i
yne WHEE HOLL . : A sour
1 Tit cs
ap

voce cee ner re MANY PATED bos

50955 Docld:32423468 Page 29

; : ; | commen . ~ wee, a



--- Page 30 ---
. f 9. Dominican Republic

Mr. Merchant explained the feeling of the Department of State
that limited supplies of small arms and other matcriel should be made
available for dissidents inside the Dominican Republic. Mr. Parrott
., Said that we believe this can be managed securely by GIA, and that)
the plan would call for final transpartation into the country being .
provided by the dissidents themselves. The Group approved the project.

Vil, u-2 Flights - Vietnam oo, oo.
Mr. Dulles and Mr. Parrott outlined generally the results of the
three successful U-2 fiights.over Vietnam, noting that Hanoi had not

been.covered because of clouds, and that it is planned to fly a mission
to cover that area as soon as the weather permits. ;

The Group agreed that no such flight should take place after
January 20th. They also requested a brief memo summarizing resuits,
for the meeting of the. 19th.

A

PRUPERFY 05
| THE WHITEHOUSE -UF

HW 50955 Docld:32493488 Page 30 —


--- Page 31 ---
onnre) wire! ©)

3 November 1960 6-5
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Minutes of Special Group Meeting, 3 November 1960

PRESENT: Messrs. Merchant, Douglas, Gray, Gen, Cabell,
Gen. Lansdale

ay J

1. Cuba _

Mr. Gray inquired once more as to the status of planning for
problems which would arise post-Castro. Mr. Merchant said he ~-
would check into the progress of the Srate Department group which
has been charged with developing recommendations on this matter.

From this the Group launched into a far-ranging discussion of
the entire concept of U.S. efforts against Castro, Mr. Douglas,
supported by Mr. Gray and Mr. Merchant, expounded the idea that
perhaps things have now progressed to @ point where covert activities

of the type originally envisaged for CLA to undertake will not be effective.

Mr. Douglas referred to the extensive program of the militia, Mr. Gray
cited the matter of arms from the Soviet bloc, and Mr. Merchant dwelt
on the increasing effectiveness of Castro's measures to control the
population in ways which the Communists have developed so well, The
latter said that he and others in the State Department had originally
thought that a popular rebellion would develop within Cuba and that

this could be augmented by the comparatively sriall-scale efforts of
exiles under CIA control. Now the game people are beginning to feel
more and more that despite the numerous defections and the economic
deprivations being experienced by the middle and upper classes, time

is actually working on Castro's side. Mr. Merchant said that he
foresaw that there would occur 4 point in time beyond which covert
intervention would not do the job. ocr

et?

Mr. Gray expressed the opinion that we will never be able to
‘clean up" the situation without the use of overt U.S. military force.
He suggested the possibility of using the CIA-backed exiles to mount 4
simulated attack on Guantanamo in order to offer an excuse for overt

THIS L

; ; AS
PROPERTY er 1
‘ eo Par ae 2o

al UAT Neer

HW 50955 Docld:32423488 Page 31. ae ee one

~.

‘\

enema


--- Page 32 ---
BS ee ee ee roe err)

. ‘intervention. This led to an involved discussion, the general conclusion
of which was that such action on our part would not be de sirable, but
_ that should Castro be foolish enough actually to attack Guantanamo
_ this would almost certainly mean war, Mr. Gray said that he had had
‘the subject of Cuba inscribed on the NSC agenda for next Monday in
order to be able to arrive at a top-level decision on this very point. a
~ He thought it essential that the policy of the U.S. should be completely. —.
understood by responsible officials, so that any overt Cuban act would
‘be met with a previously-agreed-on response.

Mr. Merchant stated that, apart from any attack on Guantanamo,

he thought that some of the previous argumentation in today's meeting

_was faulty, in that we could not have it both ways. By this he meant - ae
‘that it is not logical to conclude that an indigenous uprising is impossible
and yet that it is feasible for the U.S. to go in overtly and "clean up

’ the mess." He pointed out that if Castro's support were such that an
uprising was out of the question then an open invasion by the U.S. would
be met by a hostile population and we would be plunged into a situation
like Algeria.’ ; ;

‘Turning to the immediate problem before the Group, Gen. Cabell
outlined the general proposal to establish bases in the U.S., with the
reasons for coming to this conclusion. He cited specifically the
possibility of U.N. investigation in Guatemala and the increased scope

- of the program, which has been brought about by the increased strength
of the Castro regime. All members of the Group expressed serious
doubts as to whether such activity could be kept at all secure. Mr.

- Merchant said at one point, that although this does not representa
final conclusion on his part, he ‘is inclined to think that the proposal
embodies the worst aspect of both worlds; thatis, the choice should a ee
rest between continuing our operations entirely on foreign soil or
preparing to make the best possible case for overt intervention.

Mr. Gray suggested that the decision could be put up to his
associates at the same time Tibet is discussed. Mr.-Merchant agreed
that this.is where it should end up, but asserted that he is not prepared
to move in that direction until a survey has been made of the possibilities
of keeping operations in the U.S. unrevealed.

In this: connection Gen, Cabell mentioned the possibility of using
a refugee organization ~ either an existing one or a contrived one - to
backstop the operations. ;

erenty gn} ey PROPERT™
weed 7 Mind bide:

THE WHITE HOUS. u...,

HW 50955 Docld:32423488 Page 32 ; ; cee


--- Page 33 ---
wee ee Nar ee

Mr. Douglas said that in any case he would be prepared to have 3

the Department of Defense investigate the availability of specific ; f
locations that would be suitable. ; : }
. i

j

t

Finally, Mr. Merchant asked whether any real planning has been i,

done for taking direct positive action against Fidel, Raul and Che Guevara. //’ :

“Be said that without these three the Cuban Government would be . ; Say
leaderless and probably brainless. He conceded that it wouldbe — cof

" necessary to act against all three simultaneously, Gen. Cabell pointed “7 -

out that action of this kind is uncertain of results and highly dangerous” :
in conception and execution, because the instruments must be Cubans.
He felt that, particularly because of the necessity of simultaneous i

action, it would have to be concluded that Mr. Merchant's suggestion : .

ie hevand aur canahilitiar.

ae 4

{  pROPERTY &
i THE WHITE Gust Ger et

cee : : .

HW 50955 DocId:32423488 | Page 33


--- Page 34 ---
1 v4. Supply Drops - Cuba

Gen. Cabell explained that the Pinar de Rio supply mission had
not taken place because of the absence of specified communication
from the DZ, and the Escambray operation had been canceled because
of weather. ‘He said that these missions are still planned, and assumed 5
_that the Group had no objections. The members so signified. |

“5, U-2, Cuba

Gen. Cabell said that the photographic coverage on the first
flight had been only about 50%, because of cloud cover. He continued
that we are analyzing the exact results ona priority basis and that
some time after the middle of next week we should be in a position to
make recommendations for the missions required to extend the coverage.

Mr. Gray commented somewhat wryly that this was all right with
him since he "would certainly not-be available to discuss anything of
_ this kind before the middle of next week." The other members appeared
to have the same reaction.

V6, a oo

Policy Consideration Re Cuban Exiles:

Mr. Gray said that Assistant Attorney General Yeagley had spoken
to him after his meeting with Col. King and Messrs. Esterline and
Holman. He had said that the information given to him by the CIA —
representatives, and the arrangements for future coordination if —
necessary, were entirely satisfactory to him. He had stated, however,
that’a problem remains with respect to action the FBI should take;
that is, the FBl needs guidance in its handling of Cuban exile groups
other than those uhder the direction of CIA. ,

The Group agreed that the best-way to attack this problem would
be to have Mr. Yeagley attend next week's Special Group meeting and
discuss the matter atfirst hand. Mr. Parrott was asked to make
arrangements for this. ‘ : :

J 7. Value of Cuba to the USSR as a Base Vis-a-vis.
Cape Canaveral

Mr. Parrott gave Mr. Merchant the gist of the OSI memorandum

. °
HW 50955 Docild: 32423488 Page 34


--- Page 35 ---
te A ed ed

on this subject, which had been discussed with the rest of the Group
on 20 October 1960. ;

ao _ oe Ya Rerrett, 7 —

THOMAS A. PARROTT

on

noes ;
trae foros we
5 ( —

ct}
Seat ad ke

PET exyy

.

HW 50955 DocId:32423488 Page 35.


--- Page 36 ---
7
VS ONY |

12 August 1960-

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Minutes of Special Group Meeting - Il August 1960

PRESENT: Messre. Merchant, Gray, Dulles, and Bissell

a
i a
. . i Cy
: wind
\ 4 _ : . tot er
2, Budget for Cuban Oncrations: Mr, Bissejl summarized tne

budget which had been prepared as a basis for seeking a release from the
Reserve to finance Cuban operations for the balance of the fiscal year,
The budget for the year totals approximately thirteen and a quarter million
dollars, not including provision for the replacement of material with an-
estimated value of 1,6 million dollars to be withdrawn from Agency
inventory. Since 2.5 million dollars of budgeted and Reserve funds have ‘
been made available for this program by an earlier action, the balance —_—
required is about ten and three-quarters million dollars. Mr, Dulles

stated that a release of ten million would be requested at this time since

there is inevitably a wide margin of uncertainty as to what the actual costs

-will turn out to be. Mr. Bissell stated the amounts required by major

sub-headings as follows:

Political Action eS 960, 000,00

Propaganda 2,152,120,00
Paramilitary 8, 055,753.00
Intelligence Collection ; 833, 200,00
Counter Intelligence 325, 400,00
Communications Support 229, 420,00
Support - ; 731,718,00

ee
$ 13,287,611.00 Total

PROPER TS oo

THE WHITE AGUSE PRICE EYES GNly

SEGRET

HW 50955 DocId: 32423488 ‘Page 36



--- Page 37 ---
h
erpene )
Cech T -
ap aN
EVES ON
-2-
_ It was agreed that the operations in question must go forward and that >
the amount did not seem unreasonable for activities of this scope and ,
ra scale but it was understood that Messrs, Merchant and Gray could not

state that they had reviewed in any detail the manner in which the
estimates had been arrived at. Following further discussion, it was
agreed that this matter should be laid before the appropriate higher
authorities and a presentation would be arranged hopefully within the

next ten days. This was believed to be wise, not because any actions
involving major political risks were to be taken in the near future, but
because the Agency would soon become committed to various substantial
expenditures which should not be undertaken without reasonable assurance

that the operation was to go forward, ar .

“Weer 1, Deadly

RICHARD M, BISSELL, m.]
/ Deputy Director
i , : (Plans) ~

AW 50955 Docld: 32423488 ‘Page 37


--- Page 38 ---
Ee”
25 August 1960

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

SUBJECT: Minutes of Special Group Meeting, 25 August 1960

PRESENT: Messrs. Merchant, Gray, Irwin, Dulles

“1, Congo

Mr. Parrott outlined broadly three (or as Mr. Dulles later
described them ''2 1/2'') operational lines that we are following in
mounting an anti-Lumumba campaign in the Congo. These included:
operations through the chief advisor of the Christian Trade Unions;
the planned attempt of a Socialist labor Senator to arrange.a vote of —
no confidence in Lumumba; and a brand new contact with an alleged
leader of certain independent labor groups. He emphasized that the
latter had just come up and that we are now in the process of assessing
.the bona fides and capabilities of the individual. vot

The Group agreed that the action contemplated is very much
in order. Mr. Gray commented, however, that his associates had
expressed extremely strong feelings on the necessity for very
straightforward action in this situation, and he wondered whether
the plans as outlined were sufficient to accomplish this. Mr. Dulles
replied that he had taken the comments referred to seriously and had
every intention of proceeding as vigorously as the situation permits
or requires, but added that he must necessarily put himself ina
position of interpreting instructions of this kind within the bounds of
necessity and capability. It was finally agreed that, planning for the
Congo would not necessarily rule out ''consideration" of any particular

_ kind of activity which might contribute to getting rid of Lumumba,

Mr. Irwin commented that certain individuals in Defense have
given thought to the possibility of using high officials of the Catholic
Church in Africa to promote the general objectives of the West. In
this connection, he cited a preliminary assessment which had been 7
made of the Negro Cardinal recently appointed by the Pope ~ the ; ae
assessment being that the individual in question 3 is a man of not
PROPERTY 9 "i

THE WHITE soust orFt

. eee DA_LNOT, DLET AOL *
HW 50955 Docld: 32423486 . “Page. 3B. , :


--- Page 39 ---
Re nbd ha beh Ure dled

outstanding intelligence, ability or.drive, ‘but that he is obviously
‘well motivated. Mr. Irwin asked whether there might be other
individuals of similar, although naturally lesser, stature in the church

hierarchy who could be useful.

Mr. Merchant commented that the Catholic Ghurch in Black
Africa is not a very substantial force, Mr. Dulles concurred in this,
but added that this would be something to keep in mind as appropriate,

‘

PRUP RAS! ©

THE WHITE HOUSE

ao bys

HW 50955 -Docld:32423488 Page 39 -


--- Page 40 ---
\ee V4. Cuba

‘The DCI summarized the progress we have made in establishing
contact with certain dissident groups within Cuba. In this connection
he also noted the apparent fulfilment of a sabotage requirement which
had been levied on one of these groups as a test of its capabilities
(after this action had been cleared with the Special Group).

2 He also said that we hope to have a paramilitary force of
approximately 500 people ready. to operate by November. In answer
to Mr. Irwin's question, he outlined two possible ways of initiating —
the tactical combat phase.

® Myr, Gray then told the Group of a talk he had had with the
Director of the Bureau of the Budget. The latter had told Mr. Gray
that he had discussed the Cuban project with Mr. Macy and that as
a result of this discussion he, Mr. Stans, had two reservations that
he would like Gray to look into. ;

:! One of these had.to.do with the statement by Macy that in his
discussion with CIA representatives in connection with the latest
withdrawal from the Reserve, he had received 'no evidence" that any
effective resistance had been identified within Cuba, (Mr. Gray had
answered that in the formal presentation last week, Mr. Dulles and
Mr. Bissell had mentioned a number of such groups. )

. The second point had to do with a feeling that we might not
3
PROPERTY OF
THE WHITE HOUSE EFFICE

HW 50955 -Docld:32423488 Page 40



--- Page 41 ---
“Eiid uitld

what k

know enough about the political attitudes of the members of the Frente,
particularly as to basic freedoms, their attitude toward restoration

of seized American property, etc. (In answer to this, Mr. Gray had
pointed out that the Frente is composed of people who have broken
_with Castro, at least on the basic philosophies. }

In an attempt to clarify the situation with respect to the first
' point, Mr. Parrott told the Group about last Monday's meeting with
Mr. Macy, at which Mr. Barnes had covered in considerable detail
all aspects of the Cuban project. He said that he was ata loss to
understand how Macy could have received the impression that CIA
is not aware of dissident groups. He went on to say that in answer
to Mr. Macy's question as to the outlook, Mr. Barnes had stated -
and had developed at considerable. length - the thesis that our view
was one of limited optimism, and that he had explained in detail just
why this is so; this explanation had included specific comments on the
steps that have been, and are being, taken to identify such groups and
to assess their apparent leaders. Mr. Parrott said further that the
point had been made forcibly to Macy that it would be out of the question V
‘for CIA to attempt to mount an invasion of Cuba by itself,. without the
participation of large nurnbers of disaffected individuals within the
country. ,

On the second point, Mr. Dulles said that we do know a good
deal about the basic political sympathies of Frente members, and
cited as an example the position that had been taken as to the inclusion
of certain ultra-conservative groups. He said that the Frente had’
issued a statement of its aims, which he summarized very broadly
as being to preserve the principles of the revolution. He said thatas —
to specific stands on restoration of U.S. property rights, etc., this ;
was thought to be unwise because it would give the Frente the appearance
of being a tool of the Americans, He agreed, however, that Mr. Stans!
point was a valid one to bear in mind and said we would certainly do
so. He added that he expects to lunch with Mr. Stans in the near future
and would take that opportunity to discuss these matters further, as
appropriate. : : : .

. Mr. Parrott said that-there was no disagreement that the. political
ideas of-these individuals must be constantly assessed and must be
clearly established before the operation actually comes off. He
added, however, that it should be borne in mind that once these
politically-screened individuals had issued their general statement
of objectives, our primary operational task has been to hold the FRD
together, and that at this particular stage it would not be practical

PROPERTY Ne
THE WHITE HOUSE UF

HW 50955 Docld:32423488° Page 41.0 °°


--- Page 42 ---
to insist on a more precise spelling out of individual or group
views, — OO ; :

Mr. Parrott also said that Mr. Macy had raised a related
point which Mr. Barries and he had agreed had validity, and that
Mr. Barnes had undertaken to assure Macy that it would be given ou
adequate attention by the interagency planning group. This was a
concern expressed as to planning for the support - fiscal and otherwise -
of a new Cuban government immediately after a successful overturn
of the present one. Mr, Merchant said that he agreed fully with the
necessity for making contingency plans of this sort, and had in fact
directed three weeks ago that State officials begin to draw them up. aan

@ oPartit-

THOMAS A, PARROTT .

a

“i - ry aN

ne
vot ee

HW 50955 .Doclda:32423488 Page 42


--- Page 43 ---
While agreeing that the Government could not take an official : .

stand, Mr. Merchant expressed his personal opinion that if the [
companies should suspend operations, this would give the Soviets a
great opportunity, given the fact that the Cuban economy is 80 dependent
on oil. He pointed out that no alternative leader to Castro has yet
emerged, and that the United States would be held liable for any

’ economic crisis that might be: precipitated in this Waye.

Mr. Gray related the consideration of this sort of action to the 7 .
sugar project discussed three weeks ago by the Group. He emphasized
that in his opinion these are isolated actions and that any moves of —_—
this kind should be made only after an over-all consideration of
whether and how the United States wishes to move against Castro, |
Mr. Irwin took some exception to this, indicating that he thought it
wa's possible and perhaps desirable to take such actions as those
contemplated in the sugar proposal, apart from any concerted across-~
the-board program. Mr. Dulles emphasized that in any case we will
have to decide before long whether covert action should be taken in ;
Cuba, : ; —

- It was then agreed that a special meeting of the Group should be
held on Monday, March 14th, to consider what might and should be
done in Cuba. It was agreed that in addition to the regular members, .
Mr. Rubottom, Admiral Burke, Mr. Bissell, Mr. King and perhaps
Colonel Lansdale should attend, , .

There was then a brief discussion of Admiral Burke's letter to
Mr. Merchant, It developed that the attachment to’this letter has now
béen given the status of a JCS document but that it hassnot been forwarded
to the NSC as the JCS had desired. (Mr. Irwin said that he had held
up this action because of the informal nature of the letter.) Mr. Merchant
said the Department is preparing comments and that he hoped the JCS
paper would not be considered apart from State's comments.

Mr. Dulles said that we would require a policy decision on
whether a black radio could be established on U.S. territory, probably
in the Florida Keys. It was agreed that this proposal should be staffed
through the Scott office.

\

panct mye phy
pO pe sow oie
Na eg 7 BY od Cay

Kole

HW 50955 Docld:32423468 Page 43


--- Page 44 ---
7 April 1960

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD ~
SUBJECT: Minutes of Special Group Meeting, 7 April 1960.

PRESENT: Mr. Merchant, Mr. Douglas, Mr. Gray, Gen. Cabell

3, Dominican Republic
Mr. Gray asked the Acting DCI whether he had anything to add
on the situation in the Dominican Republic to what had been covered
by himself and the Secretary of State that morning at the NSC meeting.
General Cabell replied that he would only like to add the comment
that it appears evident that Trujillo will not consider making any
arrangements for an orderly succession to himself, but that he will
either hang on to the bitter end or flee the country on short notice,
& la Batista.

Mr. Gray asked the Group's views on what happens after Trujillo,
specifically how Castro can be kept out of the Dominican Republic. -
General Cabell commented that so far no worthwhile opposition to the
Benefactor has been identified, and that in his opinion it might well -
become necessary to dispatch U.S. forces, openly identified as such,
to the country in the immediate aftermath ‘of the demise Or flight of
Trujillo. Mr. Mercbant said that his preliminary thoughts were that
there would probably be a good chance to get OAS support for a move
of this kind to forestall Castro; on the other hand, we might expect
some internal revulsion at the arrival of U.S. forces because of the
“memory of the Marine occupation. ;

"Mr, Merchant added that Mr. Rubottom was thinking seriously.
of a plan to seal off the land approaches to the Dominican Republic
‘via Haiti, thereby requiring any sizeable Castro, effort to be an
amphibious one. He said that this plan has not yet been formally

AAS

4, Cub : an

Mr. Gray expressed satisfaction with the organizational
arrangements for interagency groups considering the continuing
development of the Cuban situation. In this connection he expressed
some concern that USIA and CLA might be working on parallel or : umanne
conflicting lines with respect to radio. General Cabell assured him
that the top people in USIA are aware of CIA plans and there showld. L
. be no crossing of wires. : meee cite

vy et pf on _ t= HITE HOUSe

NW50955 DocId:32423488 Page aa


--- Page 45 ---
\\

HW 50955 DocId:32423486 Page 45

= established to deal with the Cuban situation. He noted that a number

28 April 1960 7

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD , __.

SUBJECT: Minutes of Special Group Meeting, 2% Aprit 1960 ; ee

‘PRESENT: Messrs. Hare, Gray, Dulles

Mr. Joseph Scott of the Department of State sat in as an
obser yer. . , :

v8. Cuba

_ Mr. Gray said that he had discussed with his associates the
organizational entities within the U.S. Government which-have been

of different groups and committees, with varying interests and
objectives; are concerning themselves witn this situation and that
there seemed to him to be no chief of stafi'' to whorn all could lcok
as a central point, :

He said that the opinion had been expressed to him that Mr.
Dillon should assume this function, but that in Dillon's absence, pe,
Mr. Hare should take on the responsibility and should inform himself __..
of the general outlines of what has been going on in the Government. ,

Mr, Gray said that it had been felt essential to have such an official
available over the coming weekend, because of the expected May Day
troubles, and that since this official: should be of such a stature as
to ‘permit access to the highest levels, Mr. Hare had been decided
upon, pending Mr. Dillon's availability. . ;

In this connection it was agreed that Mr. Dillon should be brought
up to date at an appropriate time on the status of covert operations
with respect to Cuba. Lo . cs :

Inter alia, Mr. Gray expressed concern and some surprise at
statements and actions by UAR officials with regard to Cuba. Mr.
Hare explained at some length his conviction that Deputy Foreign ;
Minister Sabri (older brother of Ali Sabri) is largely responsible for omens
this kind of thing, and that it does not represent the feelings of ;
- Nasser or Ali Sabri. He traced the brother's background and described
him as a "twisted personality." pRoPesiy ™
j . » THE WHITE

ned aee Crud Aan

a


--- Page 46 ---
a

19 November 1960

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Minutes of Special Group Meeting, 19 November 1960

PRESENT: Messrs. Merchant and Mann; Douglas and Gen. Lansdale;
. Gray; Dulles and Bissell

42. Cuba

Mr. Merchant began by stating that in his opinion we are putting
more burden on the Guatemalan government with our training base than
‘that government can support for very long. He noted that Mr. Mann
believes the solution is to move our training activities to the U.S.,
but Mr. Merchant does not think we can get away with this, particularly
if an increase in numbers is contemplated: Therefore, the only solution.
would seem to be to move to another base or bases in other countries;
this would involve the same burden on the other countries as now exists
with respect to Guatemala. Although he has not discussed this point
with Secretary Herter, Mr. Merchant believes that it is time to take
another look at Cuba andif the U.S. attitude toward Castro remains
unchanged then we should consider shifting our entire posture. This
would involve a break in diplomatic relations, the support of a govern-
ment in exile, and other activities mostly overt, including some
training in the U.S.

property ©
HE WHITE HO fa

Prue oy aarea| yy

a REO E Eth : ve es

HW 50955 - Docld: 32423488 Page 46


--- Page 47 ---
Mr. Mann commented that he thinks we cannot maintain training
anywhere in Latin America indefinitely, although he does think we
could maintain small airstrips without too much danger. He said that
he believes everyone in Guatemala knows by now the true nature of
our activities there, and that if they are going to be publicized before
the world he would rather have them exposed in the U.S. rather than
in Latin America. He recognized that this would be highly embar-
rassing for this country, but that for most Latin American governments
it could be fatal. He spoke of the impending OAS investigation of
Guatemala, and conceded that OAS Support would be required to carry
out training successfully in the U.S. To this, Mr. Merchant replied
that he did not think exposure of such activities on American soil would ,
be acceptable, particularly in the U.N. _

Mr. Bissell then said that he has agreed for some time with
Mr. Mann's point as to the strain on Guatemala. He said that we have
developed an evacuation plan to be used in the event of outside investi-
gation, but that this is nota satisfactory answer to the problem. He ~
said that within about four weeks an alternate site could be established
in Nicaragua but that this would be very expensive, would tie us into
the Somoza brothers, and would call attention to Nicaragua in the same

way as Guatemala. ; : gene

Mr. Bissell said that he foresaw several possibilities for
constructive change in the training operation, some for the immediate
future and some over a period of longer range. They include:

a. A sort of refugee camp in the U.S. ostensibly .
designed for temporary care of Cuban exiles. This story
could be defended but it is difficult to say for how long
or how. effectively. ° ,

b. A guarded military facility in the U.S. This
could be handled more securely, but the existence of
an area where peculiar things are going on could not
be kept secret indefinitely. An alternative would be
private property suchas the King Ranch, but this would
take longer to arrange than a.military base.

‘c. Vieques Island, off Puerto Rico. This is fairly
remote, but the government of Puerto Rico is already
trying to get the U.S. Marines out,

PROPERTY OF
THE WHITE HOUSE OF ftu:

HW 50955 DocId:32423488 Page 47


--- Page 48 ---
d. The CIA site on Saipan. This would be very secure
but would require a large amount of airlift. ,

e. Fort Randolph, in the Panama Canal Zone. At this
location the trainees could be kept secure but would almost
certainly know where they were. ;

Mr. Douglas said that a military base could be made available,
such as Laughlin Air Force Base near Del Rio, Texas. He said that
the use of such real estate might be tied into some sort of cooperation
with Tracy Voorhees! Committee on Cuban Refugees. He felt also
that the U.S. capability for intervention in Cuba will probably not be
effective enough unless there is more overt participation than has -
been contemplated to date. Gen, Lansdale said that he and Gen. Bonesteel
were of the same opinion. , . ,

Mr. Gray supported this general position, stating that when the
current Cuban plan was approved, the situation in that country was
different than it is now. Since then, the Cubans have received sizeable
amounts of bloc arms and have organized a militia, and Mr. Gray
wondered how effective a few hundred exiles could be.. Mr. Dulles ee
acknowledged that it would be necessary to have internal support if Lt
the Castro government were to be successfully overthrown; he felt
that there is reason to believe such support might develop, perhaps
within the militia itself.

Mr. Mann expressed the opinion that the way to proceed is to
seal Cuba off from the rest of Latin America and to settle down for a
one or two year wait, presumably to see whether the tide might not turn
in our favor. He said that in the meantime we could infiltrate small
_ groups of trained Cubans as a token, but that we should postpone a
. decision on a striking force for four or five months. In this general
connection, Mr, Bissell said that even if it is finaly decided that overt
U.S. forces should be used, there still should be a nucleus of trained
Cubans available. Therefore, our present activities should be continued
in any case. ue :

Summing up, the Group decided that the possibility of splitting
the present body of trainees into three or four groups should be examined
urgently (particularly in view of Mr. Mann's estimate that the OAS
investigation might take place in two or three weeks). Alternate sites
to be examined would include Vieques, Laughlin AFB and Fort Randolph.

HW 50955 Docld:32423486 Page 46


--- Page 49 ---
HW 50955

Gi

ats eens

each “ATS
ch ra
ieee heiwed Lore

The latter location should absorb no more than 200. Mr. Douglas

cautioned that the use of DOD facilities should at the present time

be considered as a holding operation rather than a continuation or

stepping up of present training. The possibilities of establishing a

kind of CCC under the Voorhees auspices should be examined. -

/3, Advice to Assistant Attorney General

Mr. Parrott tabled the draft of suggested advice ta Mr. Yeagley
in connection with Cuban exiles. Mr. Douglas felt that it was not
desirable to give Mr. Yeagley any piece of paper. He suggested that |
Yeagley should simply be advised that the Group feels the best method
of procedure might be to prosecute one test case, e.g. Masferrer,
but not to institute wholesale prosecutions. In answer toa question,
Mr. Parrott stated that he did not know whether this procedure would
satisfy Mr. Yeagley, but that-he would discuss it with Mr. Gray, who.
had by that time left the meeting. (Later, Mr. Gray talked to Yeagley,

urha anneaarad satisfied with the aral onidance. \

Y 5, U-2 for Cuba

Mr. Bissell summarized the results of the first U-2 flight over
Cuba and asked for the Group's permission for two additional sorties
to fill in the remaining 50% coverage. The Group agreed, subject to
Mr. Gray's concurrence. (This was obtained later.) ~

aa any «) PROPERTY oF.
THE WHITE HOUSE Ofsic:

Dovld: 324293488 Page 49—


--- Page 50 ---
23 November 1960
PRUPERT? Or

—_ HOUSE OFFICE
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD THE WHITE HOUSE

SUBJECT: Minutes of Special.Graup Mecting, 23,Navemhber 1960

PRESENT: Messrs. Merchant, Gray, Gen. Lansdale, Dulles and
Bissell ;
“ 2, Cuba

Mr. Bissell reported that further consideration following the
meeting of last Saturday had led to a tentative conclusion that Saipan
would be the best place to which to move the bulk of the Cuban trainees,
He emphasized the security advantages of the location, and said that :
it is believed the move can be accomplished with our own transportation
plus two roundtrips by C-124s, These we would request the Department
of Defense to provide. We would probably move some small

-- commando-type units - about 50 men - to Fort Randolph. Mr. Bissell
also stressed the fact that additional construction costs would be
significantly less at Saipan than anywhere else.

The DCI agreed in general with this preliminary thinking, He
urged, however, that the matter of morale of the trainees bé borne
constantly in mind, and that the move not be accomplished all at once.
Gen. Lansdale agreed. Mr. Dulles also asked that President Ydigoras
be informed.

. ‘Mr. Bissell concluded that plans would not be firmed up until
receipt of Defense's report on facilities, available in the U.S.

Mr. Bissell then spoke of the report of a possible attempt by
Cuban dissidents to take over the Isle of Pines, He explained that we
have nothing to do with the plan and would in fact be unable to give much
‘support to it. He said that it is highly questionable whether this attempt
will take -piare.zm the-xseporied time schedule, or indeed at all, but
emphasized that this illustrates how initiative might be taken by others,
so that we could be presented with drastic requests for assistance on
very short notice. Mr. Bissell also mentioned the report of possible
major sabotage to be carried out in the very near future. In addition,
he said that we now have six B-26s, plus eleven crews, available for
combat, with other aircraft for supply. He noted that Nicaragua might
be used for refueling in the event of actual operations, but that the ;
immediate objective would be to obtain strips on the Isle of Pines.

Mr. Dulles remarked that this would of course require an active revolt.

: Mr. Dulles also mentioned the proposal by Peter Grace to encourage
Father Peyton (described as a sort of Catholic ‘Billy Graham) to carry
out activities in Cuba.

HW 50955 Docld:32423488 Page 50


--- Page 51 ---
30 November 1960

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

SUBJECT: Minutes of Special Group Meeting, 30 November 1960

PRESENT: Messrs. Merchant and Mann; Douglas; Gray; | -
Dulles and Bissell |
— | —t
|
a
! -
/ : | wa nate oy
2. Cuba : ere

Mr. Gray solicited the Group's assistance in arriving ata
consensus of views as to what exactly had been decided as a result
of the high-level meeting of the day before. The following points were
agreed: ; ‘

a. Mr. Gray's associates stand ready to deny U.S.
activity based in Guatemala, even though it may become
blown (Mr. Douglas urged that every effort be made to”
make it possible to deny plausibly). :

b. Ifthe program is enlarged, additional facilities
may be obtained, but at this stage not in the U.S. No
training of Cubans will be conducted in the U.S, under
present circumstances. (Mr. Bissell told the Group of
the possibility of an additional finca in Guatemala. )

c. Evacuation plans should be kept in readiness.
(Mr. Mann said that he thought he could arrange a week's
PROPERTY OF TM
THE WHITE BUUS. ET FEE

NW 50955 DBocId: 32493488 Page 51


--- Page 52 ---
notice before any OAS committee actually visited
Guatemala and that it might be possible even then to
avoid actual investigation on the spot. Mr. Bissell
said that if we do have a week, evacuation could be
carried out by Agency aircraft; if more speed is
required DOD assistance might be necessary.

Mr. Douglas, with Mr. Dulles and Mr. Bissell
concurring, felt that the possibility of emergency
evacuation to Florida under the guise of ordinary
refugees should be kept in mind. } ,

Mr. Dulles suggested that questions on Cuba might be asked at ;
the next Presidential press conference and that we should be prepared ——
‘with a statement along the lines that we do not entirely discourage ,
revolutionary activity. Mr. Merchant said he would arrange to have
a draft prepared along these lines. In this connection, Mr. Parrott
reported the request from Assistant Attorney General Yeagley for
guidance as to possible action against an alleged collaborator of
General Pedraza. (Note: Mr. Yeagley was later told that we have no
operational interest and no objection to the Department of Justice's
pursuing the case. Mr. Yeagley said that they would proceed with meal
investigation, but that it is by no. means certain the case will ever :
come to trial.). . ;

Mr. Gray then outlined his understanding of his friends' desires
with respect to organization of the anti-Castro effort. He said that the
principal need foreseen was for an individual to serve as a focal point
for diverse interests in this situation, and to be available to meet with
Mr. Gray's friends at any time. In addition, someone should be
available to deal with the FRD and to.talk to other Latin American
governments.

After a considerable amount of discussion, the consensus of the
Group was as follows: Probably two men will be required, one to handle
the overt and the other the covert aspects. They would work together
on a daily basis and both would have the entire picture in.mind, but
responsibility for the execution of covert operations would have to rest
with CIA, The overt man should ideally be a government official,

_ preferably someone senior in the Foreign Service or the Department
of State. There should be a sort of "board of directors" to oversee
all aspects of the operation. This should be the Special Group plus
Secretary Anderson when matters of major policy are considered.
(Mr. Gray was not entirely. sure that his friends would accept the two-'
man concept but Mr. Dulles and Mr. Merchant emphasized that whether —

PROPERTY f3

THE WHITE. HousL or rin.

HW 50955 Doclda:32423488. Page “82°


--- Page 53 ---
moma pk
wee Bagh

there were one man or two, CIA would have to maintain its own
organizational integrity. )

There then ensued a lengthy examination of qualifications and
availability of a number of individuals. It was finally decided that, _.
taking all things into consideration, including the aspect of quick a
availability, Ambassador Willauer would probably be the best choice.
On the CIA side, Mr. Dulles nominated Mr. Barnes. It was recog-
‘nized that these nominees would have to be checked with Mr. Gray's
associates. ; _

Mr. Mann suggested that Mr. Willauer might also do the FRD
job, but the DCI pointed out that this requires a covert approach and
must be done by the Agency.

As to Mr. Pawley, it was decided that it would be unwise to have
him embark on a grand tour or to endow him with official government
status. Mr. Merchant said he would not object, however, to Mr. Pawley's
talking to President Frondizi.. NN

Mr, Gray then mentioned the report which had reached his
friends about a representative of the FRD who had apparently just
‘returned from’a trip around Latin America. It was noted that the
individual referred to was probably Sardinius, and Mr. Dulles said
he would obtain a written report of the trip, for passage to Mr. Gray's
associates. ;

Mr. Bissell reminded Mr. Douglas of the outstanding request _
to the DOD for thirty-eight NCOs and officers for service outside the |
U.S. ; , :

Va ditt

THOMAS A. PARROTT

cae
EE a
PU ee

on y —) PROPERTY ut
i Oe ee uae:
Nednee THE WHITE HOUS2 ui. iL:

fy eee cage pe nearer

HW 50955 Docld:32423488 Page 53


--- Page 54 ---
bad cae WH dee ara see

17 February 1960

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Minutes of Special Group Meeting,. Lt Eebruary 1960

| PRESENT: Messrs. Gray, Irwin, Dulles

- Mr. Joseph Scott of the State Department sat in as an observer.
AN /;, Cuba

The project providing for covert spotting and assessment of
potential agents for eventual sabotage of sugar mills was discussed
at some leagth. Within the limits outlined - that is, that no action
would be initiated under the terms of any approval reached at tnis
meeting, but rather that approval would cover only the identification
and evaluation of assets - the Group expressed general approval.
Mr. Dulles reiterated that he was not asking for approval actually
to proceed with operations. ‘Mr. Irwin stated that he and Secretary
Douglas were enthusiastic about the project. It was agreed that it
should be presented to the Secretary of State and that Mr. Gray would
discuss it further.

_ (Later Mr. Gray reported that he had discussed this matter
with his associate. The latter had made two points:

a. He doubted the efficacy of the proposed action,
feéling that if it were successful in denying moncy to
the Castro regime which could otherwise be used for
‘subversive activities, the Cuban government could
obtain offsetting funds from other sources. .

b. He would not agree to identifying assets for this
particular sabotage operation. He would agree that the
Agency could proceed to spot and assess potential agents
for a variety of possible tasks. He said that.once this

‘PROPERTY OF
THE WHITE HOUSE nemine ent

ee: wh

HW 50955 DBocld:32423488 Page 54


--- Page 55 ---
Ghusted 7 bin oiikd,

wag done and a comprehensive program of suggested
action was drawn up, it should be submitted to the
Special Group, and if the Group recommended approval . .
it should probably then be discussed with him. | It was a
stipulated that in any case no action should take place
until his return from the trip on which he is about to
embark. oe ie
ath b Stake , ;
Mr. Scott‘also reported later that Mr. Herter had made exactly ,
the same point as outlined in b. above.)

v2, Dominican Republic

There was a brief discussion of the situation in the Dominican
Republic. Mr. Irwin commented that the Defense Department is most
interested in determining whether or nota sort of Third Force can be

identified.

PROPERTY cz
THE WHITE HOUSE Or fr

 ggpney Eves eMLY

HW 50955 DocId:32423488

wee” .



--- Page 56 ---
28 December 1960

‘MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

SUBJECT: Minutes of Special Group Meeting, 28 December 1960

PRESENT: Messrs. Merchant, Douglas, Gray and Dulles : . ;

4), Special Meeting on Cuba ;
Mr. Gray said that it is desired to setup a special meeting on

Cuba for 9:00 AM Monday, 2 January. His associates wanted particularly

to make certain that everyone concerned "clearly sees the sequence of

events. '' He also said that Mr. Pawley had hada recent conference in
the White House. : ;

Mr. Gray asked that Mr. Merchant and Mr. Dougias determine
whether their respective Secretaries wish to attend. He said that
Mr. Willauer-wotia also be on hand. Finally, he asked that the Army
colonel (Lt. Col. Egan) who, had given such an enlightening description
of the qualities of the Cuban volunteers be on hand for the meeting.
It was noted that Col. Egan is currently out of the country, but the
' DCl agreed to have him brought to Washington for the meeting.
. f . . _ .

aN

PROPERTY nF

THE WHITE HOUSE OF Fit a. IN CS HLSTORICAL
; paper b0. ARO
. manent apenas) ou) UY ‘ 2
Qik de ey DO NOT DuSTNOL—

HW 50955 DocId: 32493488 Page 56°


--- Page 57 ---
SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE
CONCLUDING REMARKS
You will, I hope, permit me some personal, but I think
not unimportant observations. I hope that you will complete your
work as expeditiously as possible as I feel very strongly the need .
for a viable Central Intelligence Agency operating, of course, within
its charter, I believe that the present furor about C.I.A, is
impeding it in the performance of its mission and the sooner it is
able to go about its business, not in a fish bowl, the better our
country will be served. I believe that we will continue to need
effective, intelligent collection and analysis for our policy makers
and I think there will be occasions when covert activities should be
undertaken in the interests of our National security,

Finally, one thing that bothers me, Mr. Chairman, is that
there is tremendous concern now -- and I don't suggest that it is
improper -- with the activities of the Central Intelligence Agency,
while at the same time péople seem not to be equally concerned
about what the Soviet Union is up to in this country, especially
through its. very many KGB agents here. I would hope that a

Congressional Committee would be interested enough to investigate

this most serious matter.

a

HW 50955 Docld?'32423488 Bage 57


--- Page 58 ---
no PERSONS/ENTITIES: DATES: CATEGORIES:

PRESIDENT EISENHOWER, DOUGLAS .
DILLON, GENERAL GOODPASTER July 5, 1960

TRUJILLO

: Dillon. Also present were Gen. Goodpaster and
General Persons. The memorandum of the conference stated: "With regard to the _
Dominican Republic, Mr. Herter said there are various things being done which .
could result in a provisional government being set up. The President said if such
a government were set up we should recognize it quickly. We could then move in with
troops on their request if need should arise. In so far as the question is one of
internal: intervention, we must use the CIA in order to avoid attribution. The

-Prestdent--thoughlwe..should=knock*out-of-anydocuments-on..file.any reference to.
starting..a,.revolution."

SOURCE: Presidential Papers of Dwight Eisenhower STARE:
(Whitman File) (DDE DIARY SERIES) ~ Ab leve pate: _ Kelley
nn Suly 6, 1975
FILE: ; .
PERSONS/ENTITIES: DATES: ~ CATEGORIES:
VICE PRESIDENT NIXON, MR. GRAY, March 14, 1960 | CASTRO
DOUGLAS DILLON : ; MONGOOSE _

OCCURRENCE?

At a National Security Council meeting on March 14, 1960 Mr. Dillon
said: . "Our objective is to bring another government to power in Cuba...there is

no. apparent alternative to the present government in the event Castro disappears.
Indeed the result of Castro's disappearance might be a Communist takeover."

"Mr. Dulles reported that a plan to affect the situation in Cuba was being
worked on. Admtrai--Burke~suggested= that~ any~plan--for-the=removal- of Cuban leadersy
should=be=package-dewb, since many of the leaders around Castro were even worse
than Castro." ; ; . ;

SOURCE: Presidential Papers of Dwight Eisenhower
(Whitman File) (NSC meeting series) 436th NSC meeting,
March 10, 1960 - Allene

FILE: DATE July 6, 1975

PERSONS/ENTITIES:

DATES:

CATEGORIES:

|

VICE PRESIDENT NIXON, DOUGLAS April 14, 1960!

DILLON, H. SHELDON (CIA), MR. LAY

TRUJILLO

ecurity Council meeting on April 14, 1960, Vice

President N; Nixon presiding, ' ': 'Mr. Dulles reported..Trujillo's position continued
to weaken and was now quite precarious... (he)-thought-further. attempts: will be made
to-kilL.on.oust-Trujille." ; oo

“Mr. Dillon’ said there was one favorable aspect.. .a£—Trujtble-could-be- removed
from-power-in—the Donifiitar-Republic while pro= -Castro-etements-were- prevented from-
seizing-power—in-that-country,—our anti-Castro-campaten~throughout-Latin- America
would Teceivea-~great-boost, The Vice President-agreed—that~getting ~ rid-of Trujillo
‘Woutd-be_a-favorabte development for” ts."

SOURCE: _ Presidential Papers of Dwight Eisenhower STAFF:
(Whitman File) (NSC meeting series, 441st meeting, April 14, |
1960) — Ab, e a. Kelley

FILE? bem | DATE Suly 6, 1975

HW. 50955 . DocTd:32423488 Page 58



--- Page 59 ---
oO PERSONS/ENTITIES:

VICE PRESIDENT NIXON, DOUGLAS
‘DILLON, H. SHELDON (CIA), MR. LAY

DATES: CATEGORIES:

April 14, 1960 TRUJILLO

OCCURRENCE: On April 14, 1960 at a National Security Council meeting Mr.
reported that a SR. Betancourt /no relation to Venezuelan leader7 had defected
from Cuba and predicted three outcomes with respect to Castro: ~( :

/ , (2) Castro's suicide aS a result of the failure |

of the Cuban experiment and (3) a trend to a socialist dictatorship and a Batista
terror regime.

‘ a ye 4 eT? pe.
— The DS a q, COFE
rs ir ku Gn ee
SOURCE: | Presidential Papers of Dwight Eisenhower STAFF:
(Whiteman File) (NSC meeting series, 441 st meeting, April 14 DATE Kelley
Py) : July 6, 1975
PALES = Ab lewe

_PERSONS/ENTITIES:

PRESIDENT EISENHOWER, VICE PRESI-
DENT NIXON, DOUGLAS DILLON, ALLEN
DULLES

DATES: | CATEGORIES:
July 7, 1960 } TRUJILLO

OCCURRENCE: At a National Security Council meeting on July 7, 1960 Mr. Dulles
stated: ''The Venezuelan government was engaged in an all-out effort, through
the OAS and otherwise, to isolate, condem and cause the downfall of Trujillo.
An important reason for the vigor of the Venezuelan efforts was the fact the

have convincing evidence that Trujillo was responsible for the assassinat@n .
attempt on Betancourt /President of Venezuelay*** “Betancourt believes

delay."" Mr. Dulles further explained that the Venezuelan Foreign Minister wants
the United States to lead the way in breaking relations with Trujillo and that

SOURCE:

Presidential Papers af Dwight Risenhower
(Whitin Vito) (NSE moet Lag Her bod, AAO NGG meat init, Ket bay
ily: 7, (on) DAT HIE ty IU eh
-Nhilewe
PERSONS/ENTIVIES: DATES: | CATEGORIES:

PRESIDENT EISENHOWER, VICE
PRESIDENT NIXON, DOUGLAS DILLON,
ALLEN DULLES

On July 7, 1960 at a National Security Council meeting 'MrewDudkeo

é ry intelli ity-egrees;—that-the~prebhem
‘of Trujitlomust_be-settied-before-the-proben-of-Castee-can~bo-doabt-withr even-
theugh-Castre—is—the-preater-threat ."" :

The NSC minutes further state that the United States told Betancourt of
Venezuela that the United States can't act without knowing who the successor to
Trujillo would be. The U.S. will work with Betancourt and Figueres of Costa
Rica on suggestions for a successor for Trujillo. President Eisenhower ‘suggested
a government in exile be ready to go into the Dominican Republic in the event
of Trujillo's downfall.

STAFF:
_ _ Kelley

4
| DaTEduly 6, 1975

SOURCE: .
oo Presidential Papers of Dwight Eisenhower
(Whitman File) (NSC meeting series, 450th NSC meeting,
Pply :7, 1960) :

— — frbilewe

HW 50955 Docld:32423488 Page 59


--- Page 60 ---
PERSONS/ENTITIES:
MR. GRAY, PRESIDENT EISENHOWER

DATES: CATEGORIES:

July 28, 1960} CASTRO
| TRUJILLO
MONGOOSE

On July 28, 1960 at a National Security Council meeting “President
Peimmec Raber hy See ace aoe ae giegae Se aS a Awe ma OG. tele ds end.can
sarily With Castro” It was
an and Domincan Republic prob-
"The President said if we attempted to take
ré settling the Trujillo situation, we would

N

frtends—te-reacha..proper=tevel-o CPT ton iLA wT
noted that Venezuela was trying to separate the Cub

lems in OAS forms. On this matter,
any action with respect to Cuba befo
be the loser."

Dens a ee Foe “ prt eed atten” |

SOURCE:

Presidential Papers of Dwight Eisenhower

STAFF s:
(Whitman File) (NSC meeting series, meeting of July 28, 1960

Kelley
PILE: DATE Suly 6, 1975
_—’ Abilewe
PERSONS/ENTITIES:

DATES: CATEGORIES:
PRESIDENT EISENHOWER, MAURICE Aug. 25, 1960 | LUMUMBA

STANS, MR. GRAY ©

OCCURRENCE: On August 25, 1960 the minutes of the National Security Council
meeting that day state: "The President suggested the United Nations might re-
cognize Katanga. Mr. Stans suggested that we might base ourselves on Tshombe
and Kasavubu and throw out Lumumba by peaceful means." (page 15)

eons

SOURCE;

Presidential Papers of Dwight Eisenhower
(Whit-man File) (NSC meeting series » meeting of August
FASELIO0 Ab,lewe

PERSONS/ENTITIES:

Kelley
DATE July 6, 1975

CATEGORIES:

DATES:

"PRESIDENT EISENHOWER, GORDON GRAY, {| Sept. 21, 1960 | LUMUMBA

CCURRENCE:

On September 21, 1960, at a National Security meeting, Mr. Dulles
Said: "" 4

Mebuteched=ferked. ***Mobutu appeared
to be the effective power in the Congo for the moment, but Lummba.was=-net
Giak- SiS Hs eh FES C1 ~ fd GS Tha S 1

nyer~ as "

SOURCE: Presidential Papers of Dwight Eisenhower ;
(Whitman File) (NSC meeting series, meeting of Sept. 21, 1960);

STAFF:
Kelley
PILE: DATE July 6, 1975

“EW 50955 poora TL Bobe¥SGe 60



--- Page 61 ---
CATEGORIES

DATES:
LUMUMBA.

Oct. 24, 1960

By

OCCURRENCE:
"an intercepted UAR /Egypt7 message indicated that five Congolese soldiers
had foots to assassinate Mobutu on the 15th of October

' PERSONS/ENTITIES:
PRESIDENT EISENHOWER, GORDON GRAY
On October 24, 1960 at a National Security Council meeting Mr

Dulles reported:
{-was_-probable—that-he-would-have-beer-eauphte! (page 16)
STAFF:
Kelley
——July 6, 1975

DATE:

Presidential Papers of Dwight Eisenhower

SOURCE:
(Whitman File) (NSC meeting series, minutes of meeting,
196
Weieber 24, 1960) _ Abilewe
PERSONS/ENTITIES: DATES: CATEGORIES:
GORDON GRAY, MARION W. BOGGS Feb. 12, 1960 LUMUMBA .
; CASTRO :
; | TRUJILLO . :
OCCURRENCE? On Febraunyeddypui066- a "'special'' National Security Council meeting
was held, and Marion W. Boggs, Deputy Executive Secretary, attended as Acting
Executive Secretary. The only record of this meeting appearing in the NSC meeting
series of minutes is a one- e-page | notation which | states: ut

| : aad "
| ee
We " TAPE?
Kelley

DATE July 6, 1975

Presidential Papers of Dwight E1senhower
CATEGORIES

SOURCE:

Feb. 12, 1960
FILE: Ab, Lewe.

PERSONS/ENTITIES:

le
(Whitman File) (NSC meeting series, special NSC meeting,

SOURCE:

EILE:

Page 61

HW 50955 DocId:32423488



--- Page 62 ---
MOTE ON GRAY TESTIMONY FOR FAOS:

_: short summary
If we don't re-write the Gray chemaminmgx, you
should note to the senators that since we w
drafted it we have received a new batch of
key documents from the Eisenhower Library

which are reflected (quoted) in the

Gray Chronology.

[dd Wyn” coll famey

NW 50955 Doclda:32423488 Page 62 . .


--- Page 63 ---
To: Files
From: Frederick Baron
Re: DELETION IN SPECIAL GROUP MINUTES OF NOVEMBER 3, 1980

Date: July 7, °.1975

In a phone conversation with Jim Wilderotter of the White House,
Wilderotter assured me a& that after the line "beyond our gg capabil-
ities" on page 3, there was a double space followed by
Item 2, which deals with the African continent (not Congo),
followed by a double space, then Item 3, which deals
with Southeast Asta.
‘Wilderotter assured me that neither item related to
our inquiry. He said that there was nothing deleted on

page 3 that related to KCuba.

HW 50955 Docld232423488 Page 63


--- Page 64 ---
EXHIBITS FOR THE EXAMINATION OF GORDON GRAY

castro* :
Special Group Minutes, November 3, 1960.
Special Group Minutes, August 12, 1960.
Lumunba :
Special Group Minutes, August 25, 1960.
Special Group Minutes, September 8, 1960.

Trujillo

Memorandum of July 1, 1960 from J. C. King, Chief, Western Hemisphere
Division to the Acting DcI. ;

Minutes of the Special Group of December 29, 1960.

Minutes of the Special Group of January 12, 1961.

* The Special Group Minutes of February 17, 1960 could be used for —
two purposes: (1) To establish the general atmosphere in the
Special Group of planning, sabotage, operations in Cuba; and. (2)
Tne fact that, at least in this case, Gray's "associate" was
President Eisenhower. ,

WW 50955 Docld:32423488 Page 64


--- Page 65 ---
TO: . Files
FROM: Frederick Baron
DATE: July $, 1975

SUBJECT: SUMMARY OF INTERVIEW WITH GORDON GRAY

GENERAL BACKGROUND

1. Staff Responsibilities Under Eisenhower:

Gray said that the structural chain of command ran directly from the -
DCI to the President during the Eisenhower administration. Allen Dulles
was able to approach Eisenhower directly, rather than through Gray.

.

Andrew Goodpaster staffed President Eisenhower on many of the same
subjects that Gray worked on. Gray was responsible for long-range planning;
Goodpaster was responsible for spot. work. Gray said that Goodpaster and he
kept each other "intimately informed". However, Gray said that any covert
action program would go through him and not Goodpaster. ‘Although I would
tell Goodpaster about anything I discussed with the President." Some covert
action programs were extremely tightly held, for example, on the U-2 incident
only the following people were knowledgeable: Eisenhower, Goodpaster, and John

Eisenhower.

“YZ didn't live with Eisenhower 24 hours a day. I don't know everything
that he did. But I do think I knew every major. decision, approval, or action

of Eisenhower's."

2. Special Group Function

At the 54/12 committee, Gray said, "I represented the President's interest,

that was my role."

HW 50955 Docld:32423486 Page 65


--- Page 66 ---
Gray said that shortly after the BERLIN TUNNEL, Eisenhower said,

"YT want the 54/12 comaittee to consider any action that impinges upon.
— - Pans

Gray said that in almost every case, a proposed covert action would

the sovereignty of another country."

have been discussed with the State Department and would have been. staffed
out before Special Group meeting. ‘Most of the rest of us did not have a chance

to reflect before the meeting."

Gray said that during his tenure, there was no chairman of the 54/12

(Special Group). But perhaps Merchant conducted the meetings.

Gray said that during the transition to the Kennedy administration, he

asked McGeorge Bundy to promise him that the Special Group would not be

washed out. Gray explained that the Special Group was necessary for the

protection of the President. The Special Group discussions allow the President

the chance to know in advance about actions which are potentially embarrassing
. to him. The President's representative to the Group (Gray, then Bundy) has the

right to object to an action and take it up with the President. The President

has a chance to know about everything that goes on in the Special Group, and

through his Special Assistant for National Security Affairs, the President would

have a chance to say “no” to a proposed action. Gray said that the presence

of the Special Group would protect a President from operations such as assass-

inations.

3. "His Associate":

Initially, Gray did not recognize the phrase used by Parrott in the
Special Group minutes 'Mr. Gray's associate" or "His associates". Gray's
first reaction was that “his associates" would probably refer to members

of his NSC staff.

“HW 50955 Docld:32423488 Page 66


--- Page 67 ---
-3- . _

But after seeing the minutes of the Special Group mecting of
February 17, 1960, Gray said that it was clear that in those minutes

‘

Zé
‘hig associate" referred to President Eisenhower.

Gray said that he never used the phrase "associate", that was
Parrott's phrase. Gray was not aware the phrase was used at the time
in those minutes and couldn't, without reconstructing each minute, be
sure it referred to the President in cach case. He said that when he

attended the meetings,he would refer to "the President" directly.

(Note: Since the phrase "the President’ is never used in Parrott's
minutes, it is fair to assume that at least some of the references to

"Mr. Gray's associate! are euphemisms for President Eisenhower.)

NSC_DOCU DOCUMENTS.
Gray recalls that. the President called him, and perhaps Allcn Dulles,
‘into his office shortly after Gray's appointment and said that “no
minutes, notes, or menos of Special Group meetings are to be kept, except
by the DCI and they are to be kept in the DCI's files." Gray said that
- Dulles was not present at this ineeting. He knows that he would have told

Dulles shortly afterwards.

Gray did not keep personal notes of the Special Group meetings.
Although he did defy the Presidential directive in one specific instance,

by. deciding | to make a memorandum of every meeting with the President relating

to the subject of Cuba. These memoranda are on file at the, Presidential

Library in Abilene, Kansas. -
Gray said that he never reviewed Thomas Parrott's minutes of the

Special Group. But. the NSC minutes were passed to the principals at the

HW 50955 Docld:324273488 Page 67


--- Page 68 ---
~4-

meeting for their review. Gray prepared the "records of action" for

the NSC, along with Jinmy Lay, Gray's assistant.

LUMUMBA

Gray said that he did not remember the August 25, 1960 meeting at
which it was reported that Gray commented that "his associates had expressed ,
extremely strong feelings on the necessity for very straight-forward action"
in relation to LUMUMBA. Gray said at first that he did not remember
LUMUMBA's position in the Congo. Gray said that he did not remember talking .

with Eisenhower about LUMUMBA.

However, Gray does remember that "we were anti-LUMUMBA and wanted to

see him removed from his position of responsibility."

In reference to the August 25 meeting, after he had seen the minutes
of the meeting, Gray said that "when I said- ‘straightforward action’, certainly
assassination would be one possibility." Gray continued to say that Allen
DULLES. was consistently in opposition to assassination and “he was probably

‘saying to me that assassination was one of the things we shouldn't do."

; \
With reference to testimony received by the Select Committee from Robert

JOHNSON, a State Department official who was a member of the Policy Planning ©
Council, he said that he had no recollection of a meeting in the summer of
1960, at which President EISENIOWER ordered the assassination of LUMUMBA or

said words to that effect.

Gray said that he knows Bronson TWEEDY, but he never discussed LUMUMBA

with TWEEDY.

HW 50955 Docld:32423438 Page 66


--- Page 69 ---
‘TRUJILLO
"T am sure there was no discussion with EISENIOWER about the

: assassination of TRUJILLO."

"I don't see how the DCI and the Department of State could have
approved arms shipments without going up to the Special Group... The
DCI should have taken a suggested course of action to the Special Group

.

_after checking with State."

Gray said: "A high-powered weapon with a telescopic site would

connote to me that it would be used for the purpose of assassinating an

individual."

CUBA
Gray said that President EISENHOWER would frequently remark at
meetings on Cuba that an operation should be planned so that it would be

carried through successfully, otherwise it should not be planned at all.

Referring to the minutes of the Special Group meeting of February 17,
1960, Gray’ said. that at some point during that period.of time, Allen
DULLES brought his sugar mill sabotage plan to President EISENHOWER, who
listened attentively. Afterward, the President said, "I don't think
sabotage of sugar mills will do something significant. Bring me a complete
plan." Subsequently, DULLES brought the President a four-point program:
propaganda; economic sanction; sabotage; and the training of Cuban exiles.
GRAY said the President approved this memo. (Note that Gray also said that he

made a memo of this meeting and subscquent meetings on Cuba.)

bb delay” as :
ad QOH RIL Shae at

YUULa

HW 50955 Docld:32423488 Page 69


--- Page 70 ---
~G-

After the BAY OF PIGS, Gray called President SISENHOWER and
offered to show him all of the memos that Gray had prepared on Presidential
mcetings on Cuba, ‘Gray said that JOHN EISENHOWER obtained the memos and
‘brought them to Gettysburg. Gray and President EISENHOWER reviewed the ;
memos, Gray said that the President objected to the word “planning” in
reference. to a Cuban invasion, on the basis that there was no actual military

planning. EISENHOWER suggested that the page should be retyped to change

the word "planning". Gray said they did retype the page.

Gray said that although in his mind and EISENHOWER's » there was no
military "planning'', definitely EISENHOWER knew that Cuban exiles were being

trained for an amphibious landing in Cuba,

President EISENHOWER went so far in contingency planning, said Gray, as to
advocate to Allen DULLES the formation of a government in exile among the
Cuban community. But, Gray said, the Cubans could never settle among them-

selves who would constitute the leadership of such a government,

Referring to the minutes of Special Group meeting of August 12, 1960,
Gray remembers the presentation by Richard BISSELL of a budget for Cuban
operations over. 13 million dollars, with a heavy emphasis on paramilitary
operations, Gray said that the reference at the end of the memo to laying.
this budget before "higher authorities" for approval clearly referred to

President EISENHOWER.

Referring to the minutes of the Special Group meeting of November 3, 1960,
- at which MERCHANT asked a question about whether there had been planning "for |

taking direct positive action against FIDEL, RAUL, and (HE GUEVARA," Gray said

HW 50955 Docld:32423488 Page 70


--- Page 71 ---
“HW 50955

-7-

that he-did not remember the meeting. Gray acknowledged, however, that

the phrase "direct positive action" in this context "could have included
assassination." Gray said that the reaction by General CABELL that such

action would be beyond CIA capabilities, was the "usual DCI reaction".

Referring to the Special Group minutes of December 28, 1960, Gray said
that "the special meeting" mentioned therein is clearly a meeting with the President.
Gray though that this must have been the last meeting on Cuba with the =~
President, the purpose of which would have been to clean up the Cuba project
for the new administration, Gray said that there must have been dozens of

meetings on Cuba (all of which will be reflected in the Gray memos in Abilene).

CASTRO/GAMBLING SYNDICATE OPERATION, PHASE I

Gray said that he was completely unaware of any conversation between

Richard BISSELL and Sheffield EDWARDS about establishing underworld contacts

for the purpose of an assassination attempt on CASTRO. Gray also said that.

he was unaware of any development, within the Technical Services Division of

the CIA, of assassination devices to be used against CASTRO such as lethal cigars.
Likewise, he was unaware of the development of any devices designed for the

disorientation or embarrassment of CASTRO.
Gray said that he knew BISSELL well, ‘but not EDWARDS.

Gray said that, if such operations were in progress, the DCI should have
known about them. Gray said that if the DCI knew about such operations, "he
would have raised it at the Special Group or with me. He didn't. I think I
would have known if Allen DULLES had discussed such subjects with the President."

Gray said that it was possible that BISSELL was acting unilaterally on this

Docld:32423488 Page 71


--- Page 72 ---
-8-

matter, Gray said that he'd talked to Andrew GOODPASTER about the recent
news stories which indicate that there was assassination planning against
CASTRO during this period of time, and COODPASTER said that he'd never

heard about such things.
EXECUTIVE ACTION

"YT never heard of EXECUTIVE “ACTION until David BELIN mentioned it to

me."
ASSASSINATIONS GENERALLY

: Gray said that he remembered two mentions of assassination: (1) When
NASSAR was riding high, someone at the planning board said "we ought to bump
him off", But Gray said this was not a serious discussion. . Assassination was.
not an option that went to the President. (2). At the PFIAB meetings, one
member consistently would ask the CIA "about bumping off the leadership in
Hanoi", Gray did not think this was a serious suggestion. Gray said the
member who suggested this is "well-known" and he was reluctant to provide the

name to us.

"JI followed closely any covert operations I was interested in." Gray said
that "if I had known of any assassination attempt, I probably would have called"
the responsible official to stay abreast. He said he didn't know of any such

attempts,

AW 50955 Docld:32423488 Page 72


--- Page 73 ---
interview Questdons For Gordon Gray
TRUJILLO

1. MEMO of July 1, 1960 from J.C. King, (Chief, WHD) to Acting
DCI abekik recommending the delivery of arms (high-powered rifles
with telescopic scopes) to the opposition of TRUJILLO. The Memo
says that "APPROVAL FOR DELIVERY OF THESE ARMS HAS BEEN GIVEN
BY ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF STATE ROY RUBOTTOM".

~Emamkhem Were there any proceedings of the Special Group at

this time which authorized delivery of arms? (We don't have
record of any authorbzation until January 12, 1961 S.G. Minutes)

-If not, did the DCI and Assistant Secretary of State exceed
their authority? oo .

-Generally, what was the procedure in the Eisenhower administratior
for handling the approval of such a project?
-Could the DCI approve it under his own authority?
~Did the Assistant Secretary of State exceed his authority
by not requesting?@& receiving approval foom the Secy of Stat

-Shouldn't the Special Group have been consulted?

2. SPECIAL GROUP MINUTES of 12 JANUARY 1962. GRAY was present.
The Group approves shipment of arms to "dissidents inside
the Dominican Republic". ;
-Do you gemmem remember this event? Are the minutes accuragte?
-What was the policy behind the approval?
-Weren't the weapons intended for use in assassination?

NW 50955 DocId: 32423488 Page 73


--- Page 74 ---
To; Files

From: FDB :

Re: NOTES ON TESTIMONY OF ROBERT H. JOHNSON (6/18/75)
Date: 7/5/75

Biographical Background
1951-62 National Security Council staff member
1962-67 State Department, member of Policy Planning Council

Chronology of Events

Summer, 1960 Johnson attended a meeting of the NSC to discuss

developments in the CONGO. "At some time during that
discussion, President EISENHOWER said something --
I can no longer remember his-words -~ that came

across to me as an order for the assassination
of LUMUMBA...There was no discussion; the meeting
simply moved on."
-~Johnson said he might have omitted the statement
from his de-briefing memo due to its sensitivity.
-- J. said probably Allen DULLES and Gordon GRAY
were present at the meeting (in the Cahinet Rood).
--The formal record of decision by the NSC is
unlikely to contain infommation on this subject,
he said. :
--The memos which Johnson did on the meetings would
be with President Eisenhower's papers. (10)

"I was surprised *«...that I would ever hear a President

say anything like this in my presence or the presence
of a group of people. I was startled."

HW 50955 DoclId:32423488 Page 74

