
--- Page 1 ---
| 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |

180-10111-10051

AGENCY :
RECORD NUMBER :

RECORD SERIES :

AGENCY FILE NUMBER :

ORIGINATOR :
FROM:
_ TO:

TITLE:

DATE:
PAGES:

SUBJECTS :

DOCUMENT TYPE :
CLASSIFICATION :
RESTRICTIONS :
CURRENT STATUS :
DATE OF LAST REVIEW :

OPENING CRITERIA :

COMMENTS :

v9.1

HW 50955 Docld: 32263956

Assassination System Date: 10/2/201

Identification Form

Agency Information

HSCA
180-10111-10051

NUMBERED FILES
012509

Document Information

HSCA
CIA

09/24/1978
8

CIA, METHODOLOGY .
OSWALD, LEE HARVEY - RUSSIAN PERIOD, RETURN TO U.S.
KGB

GOLITSIN, ANATOLI

SUMMARY
Unclassified
1A

Redact
01/01/2003

Photocopy of note attached. Box #:222.

Page 1


--- Page 2 ---
KENNEDY

\ .
INVESTIGATION INTERVIEW SCHEDULE
1. Identifying Information:
'Name__Donald Deneslya_ - Date September 24, 1978
Address__12508-Knowledge.Lane_  ——§s Place North Arlington, Virginia
| City/State Bowie, Maryland 20715 “Telephone (301) 464-2361
’ Date of Birth __ Mors va
Social Security Spouse
os —_ Children
2. Physical Description: . /
Height a Color Eyes ‘ Hair
Weight : ; _. Special Characteristics |

Ethnic Group

.
.
“ roy

3. Personal History:

. @. Present Employment: Self-employed real. estate agent —
Address Above : ; ; ;

Telephone Above _

b. Criminal Record
1. Arrests _
2. Convictions
4. Additional Personal Information:
a. Relative(s): Name

Address

_.b. Area frequented:

c. Remarks:

. / <P :
0 SO .
. “> - aan
PENCE ANOS NEE PB. Kelly

a“ ; :
Da Form #4-B
HW 50955 Docld:32263956 Page gte



--- Page 3 ---
KENNEDY

SELECT COMMITTEE ON ASSASSINATIONS

Name Donald Deneslya ; Date 9-24-78 “pime 1:00 p.m.

_ Address 12508 Knowledge Lane | Place __North arLinaton, Va. -

Bowie, Maryland 20715

Interview: Subject was directed to the writer by former Chief: ?
of. Counterintelligence of the CIA. He is currently working

as a-real estate agent in Maryland but is planning shortly

to leave for Qslo, ‘Norway, where he will become involved in

the importation and sale of American automobiles.

He. was, employed by” the Central Intelligence Agency
from 1961 to 1964. During this ‘period he became involved .
as Administrative Assistant for a Russian defector, Golitsin,:..
also known as "Stone." In this capacity he was to spend
approximately. five hours each day assisting Stone in the pre-
paration of a book... His "cover" was, that he (Donald) was .
a student at Georgetown University, although Stone knew that
he was CIA. He described this work, under the, crypotonym,
"“ARLADLE project,” "AE" being the prefix relating to Soviet
Russia. 7 . ,

When Stone, or’Golitsin, --as Donald referred to him,
had been processed by the CIA and his bona fides accepted. * He,

was domiciled in a house in the McLean area of Virginia. He

a cla ho a Stn
Interviewer “Signature

wt . ; woe ; Yo eA Son,
Typed Signature James P elly ) :

HW 50955 Docld:32263956 Page 3


--- Page 4 ---
AW 50955

Donald Deneslya Interview
Page 2:

says that Gobitstn .was given a settlement of approximately
$200,000.00 and provided with Donald as an A.A. and guards.
Golitsin was first given the name "John Stone." His wife

was called "Irene" and his daughter. "Kitty." The CIA

had told him that he could write a book.

It was Donald's feeling that Golitsin-.was a very
intelligent defector. His knowledge of leaks from Western
Intelligence sources was phenomenal. He turned up traitors
in many Western countries, including but not limited to:
Wennerstrom in Sweden: two West German Generals, and Willy
Brandt's secretary; a high-level French leak in NATO (Cf.,
Devos joli information) and gave the CIA information which
led to the unmasking of "Kim" Philby, then the number two
man in British Intelligence, as a Soviet agent. Donald said
that Golitsin had been stationed in Vienna in 1954 and then
brought back to the Soviet and placed in the section of So-
viet (KGB) Intelligence which dealt with America and the
Western countries. In this capacity he was able to read
the material which these traitors had been sending to the
Soviet side. He had an incredible memory. and had been plan-
ning to "come over" to our side for some time so he prepped
himself on things which would be to our interest to know.

He defected in 1961 in Helsinki. Howard Osborne went over

to Helsinki to bring him back to the United States. One of

BPocld:32263556 Page #


--- Page 5 ---
AW 50955

Donald Deneslya Interview
Page 3.

the functions of Golitsin in Moscow had been the reading
of high-level American Intelligence Reports which convinced
him that there was a "mole" in the CIA, but he could not
identify this person by name. While he was working for
Golitsin,. Golitsin dictated a long letter describing the
deficiencies in Western Intelligence agenéies' which he was
going to give to Robert Kennedy. It was Golitsin's feeling

that the Soviets were winning the Intelligence War.

Golitsin's principal handler was a Colonel Leonard

Weigner, a foreign-born agent whose parents had come out of
Russia through Mancuria. Weigner had been in Air Force
Intelligence. He became involved in the Pirigov case in
1948-49, This involved a Russian MIG pilot who defected and
brought his plane intact to the West. Weigner seemed to .
get along very well with Golitsin. Others who knew him at
the time were Howard Osborne, now retired; Ed Knowles; Dave
Murphy (after 1963); John McMahon, a side-kick to Weigner
out of SR-CI and Tennent Bagley, aka "Pete". Bagley, who was
head of Counter Intelligence in the Soviet Russia Division.

He also mentioned Ted Poling, a Deputy to Bagley in SR.

Docld:322635956 Page 3


--- Page 6 ---
Donald Deneslya Interview
Page 4. :

In November 1962 Donald received a strange request
from Golitsin. Rudolf Nureyev was appearing in Chicago, I1l-
linois and there was an ad in the paper that tickets’ were
available at a certain bookstore. He wanted Deneslya to
contact the store and find out where Nureyev was staying. .
Deneslya had heard that the KGB was planning to kidnap or
kill Nureyev.

Deneslya told the writer that a Charles Bohr, a
CIA doctor, was the case officer on Golitsin. Bohr was a
psychiatrist. Deneslya said that he never heard anyone
even remotely suggest that Golitsin was "paranoid" until
he heard about the testimony of ex-CIA officer John Hart
before HSCA. It was his feeling that in 1963 the Agency
had great respect for Golitsin because of the information
which he was providing. There were times when they would

_gét exasperated with him because he would sometimes go over
the heads of the people he was dealing with ‘if he didn't
think they were reacting to his information: Golitsin was
apprehensive about Soviet world intentions and made no bones
about it. He knew how widely the Soviets hdd penetrated
other intelligence agencies. He told us about Felfe (ph.)
and Klemens who had penetrated the Gehlen Organization of
West German Intelligence which was the same as penetrating

the CIA because the Gehlen group was an extension.of CIA.

HW 50955 DocId:32263956 Page 6


--- Page 7 ---
Donald Deneslya Interview
Page 5.

From February to July 1963, Golitsin went to England to
advise the British on the extent of Philby's damage. Deneslya
says that when he returned to this country the attitude of
some people in the SR Division had changed towards Golitsin.
He detected a hostility towards Golitsin which had not been
there before.

When Donald: first came into the CIA he worked in the
Foreign Documents Division. Among the various types of re-
ports which came across his desk were "contact" reports
which filtered in from the many contact divisions which
the Agency had around the world. One.in particular caught
his eye, circa July-August 1963. It concerned an American
re-defector, a Marine, who would be returning to the United
States “with his family." This ex-Marine had worked in
“Minsk in a radio factory. The report, which Deneslya says
came out of New York City, did not mention this defector
by name. This, in itself, was not unusual because. the: ‘Con-
tact Division liked to conceal sources. He said the report
identified this person as a former Marine "cpl." or "cpt.",
which Deneslya felt could mean corporal or captain. He
was certain they were talking about Lee Oswald.

Deneslya said we could find this report probably in
the Industrial Registry for the radio factory in Minsk. He

said there was only one radio factory in Minsk. This Registry

HY 50955 Docid:32263956 Page 7


--- Page 8 ---
HW 50955

Donald Deneslya Interview
Page 6. :

is maintained by the CIA at Langley, Virginia headquarters
and he thinks it was on the second floor in corridor "H."
The fact that the contact report was out of New York was
not significant because the report could have originated

in Moscow and was rerouted and rewritten in New York, again
to conceal the point of origin.

He also told me that it was his experience that some-
times the Agency, when they want to surface material in the
"overt" side of the CIA, will say that it came from that side
when in fact it did not.

Deneslya said that it was also his information that the
Russians sent over "dispatched" agents from time to time.

He recalls that at one time there was discussion of an agent
who was caught because. the Russians stamped his passport
twice at different pages with the same stamp but with a dif~
ferent date and this game him away. He did not recall the
agent's name.

Deneslya said that the Committee should determine who
made out the #201 on Oswald--who opened it and what division
they were in. He said that about a year after he gave testi-
mony before the Senate Intelligence Committee (1975) he saw
a report in the newspapers that someone in the ‘CIA had recom-
mended that Lee Harvey Oswald be contacted.

Donald gave the writer a written authorization to in-

spect his Senate Intelligence Committee testimony.

Docld: 32263956 Page @


--- Page 9 ---
Dll Drnnrk.


