
--- Page 1 ---
___*.

180-10145-10269) | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS is 1992

. /— 02Le, o—-

Le SECRET. . Betsy Palmer

May 1, 1°78

Cable Traffic, Mexico City/Director
Cctober 1653

‘

#4 72527 to MEXT from DIR dated 10/1/63

1. Basic Hdgtrs position -- assist any responsible anti-Castro
group. JURE qualifies. 1/2 can give covert assistance but rot jeopardize
his ops utility. Recommend Lanier contact be maintained.

2. Julio Lanier Hevia one of original members Pro-Unidad Cubdne
en Exilio formed February 1962.

3. Manolo Ray and Ernesto Betancourt (MEXI 6255) of ELC have had
dealings in past and jointly held discussions with U.S. govt. on Cuban
problems. Possible therefore Lanier and Betancourt approaches related.

#79557 to MEXI from DIR, dated 31 October 1963 i

1. Do not wish MEXI station intervene wit Mexi foreign minister
behalf JURE reps as thig,would ooviously establish official U.S. support
JURE. Hdgtrs not aware Tdftami lL 2 has foreign minister contact but if he can
assist on visa problem no objection. Might be useful L/2 make pretense of
helping in order appear cooperative to Lanier.

a - Angel Luis Guiu Figueredo was chief military operations MRP

in Cuba until took asylum May 1961. WAVE asset mid 62 to mid 63. Rogelio
Cisneros Diaz is member JURE Executive Board and former national coordinator
MRP in Cuba.

#6455 to DIR from MEXI, dated 9 Cctober 1963

oO)

1. JURE rep in Mexico, Julio Lanier Hevia, told tiffamiiJ2 that
long-range seaplane lined up for use against Cuban soil. Currently used
commercially haul shellfish. Based near Tampico. ‘Two JURE leaders coming
Mexico soon to inspect it. L/2 will try elicit more details.

c/s Comment; Requested timely reporting re any air strikes being
Planned or mounted against Cuba by anyone.

Cuban Ambassador to Mexico, 1963 - Joaquin Hernandez Armas

THIS COPY IS NOs

FOR RELEASE.
SECRET

JOIYFS-102 UF


--- Page 2 ---
:
t
i
|
{
i
i

SECRET

SERGIO SRCACHA SMITH SB FI9EF 5
September 14, 1965

I Loose Documents

Reply to the Commissioner of Immigration and Naturalization
Service from DD/P stating: Reference is made to the request
dated 23 August 1965 concerning Sudject (File No. AL 055 004 TC)
The files contain no pertinent additional information to that
previously forwarded to the FBI in CScl-3/764, 41h
dated 30 March 1961, subject: Friends of Democratic Cuba

f
In yellow manila envelope: Letter to agency dated
23 August 1965 referred to above.

II 201-835474 7:(Personality File Action Request) June 25, 1968

PAeASHA/ dad [I [ebstee

Attended college in Havana

A graduate of Columbia University Law School

Served in Cuban Diplomatic Service before Castro

New Orleans delegate of Frente Revolucionaria Democratico in 1960
‘Additional info in File 100-300-017

June 9, 1967 Memo for Record
Reference; Brief Comments re; FBI Report, DBB 78940 of
25 April 1967
States; Other sources have stated that Gordon Novel and
Arcacha Smith have "marquie” letters granting them immunity
and are allegedly employed by CIA.

Garrison's investigation started when Everett Gordon
Schaeffer (phonetic) took a deposition from David Ferrie
in which Ferrie admitted knowing Lee Harvey Oswald.

November 13, 1975 (outgoing message: on Smith for Customs.
DPOB 1923, Cuba. Lawyer: FBI has further infomation on hin.

SECRET



--- Page 3 ---
Sergio arcacha Smith
Page 2
Betsy Palmer

Third Agency Deletions

1. FBI document (DBC-00999) dated 21 Feb, 1967, Classification: not given
Subject: Adgtddtydd Assassination/JFK Nov. 22, 1963, Dallas, Tex,
File # - not given, !

2. FBI document (DBB 78198) dated 30 March 1967, Classification: not given
Subject: Assassination/JFK Nov. 22, 1963 Dallas, Tex.
FBI File # : (S) 62-10960 (Bureau)

3. FBI document, DBB-77295, dated April 10, 1967
Classification: not given
Subject: Assassination/JFK, Nov, 22, 1953 Dallas, Texas
FBI File #4: Not given

SECRET


--- Page 4 ---
Fo nen taten se tena oenman ernment tceEre RInNA RA mine

Cc
aoe SECR cT Betsy Palmer

Mey 1, 1978

SERGIO ARCACHA SMITH - Office of Security File Review Attsoee)s
April 28, 1978 one eee

1. Search Request on 4/6/67
2. Report deleted, dated 7/19/61 - Third Party Information

3. Sergio visits survivors of Cuban exile infiltration of U.3. who landed
in New Orleans and were hospitalized because of their weakened condition.
He tried to see them on 3 May 1961 but entrance to the hospital was denied
until his bona fides could be established. Visited them on 10 May 1961,
Arcacha then head of New Orleans chapter of CRC.

4, Washington Start article, dated 1 April 1967 on Garrison proble - warrent
issued for Arcacha's arrest on charges of conspiring to burglarize munitions
bunker in 1961 with Gordon Novel.

9. Bio memo - undated. Sergio Arcacha Smith one of promoters of Friends of
Democratic Cuba in New Orleans, 6 January 1961. Investigation conducted by
@ reliable Miami Station asset concluded that FRC organized for personal gain.

6. FBI memo on FRD, 1/18/61, New Orleans, deleted,

7. Memo dated 31 May 1967 by Ramond G. Rocca
Subject: Garrison and the Kennedy Assassination - Gordon Dwane Novel

A. Summary - Novel has both claimed and denied CIA affiliation --
a thorough check of CTA records shows no affiliation, t is possible that
NBC is supporting Novel to get a large audience for expose of Garrison.
Novel may have exaggerated his presumed ‘relationship with Sergio Arcacha
Smith who also is not CTA affiliated,

B. Novel is mysterious -- little information -- 29 year old former
owner of bar in French Quarter and an electronics expert.

C. In Columbus, Ohio, Novel is free on $10,000 bond ~ living in a
rent-free apartment and drives a car with dealer tags. Rocca questions where
money is coming from.

D. Novel in McLena, Virginia 25-26 March 1967. Given a polygraph
vy Lloyd Furr. Furr and Richard L. Bast operate firm Redex -- sell audio
and counter audio devices,:

E. CIA finds no evidence of ever having an Evergreen Advertising
Agency which Novel claims he worked for and was CIA front.

F. Records show CIA never recruited or paid Arcacha directly but
since he was associated with ?RD in New Orleans, which was created with cIA
assistance, guidance anf financial support may have been given him through
the Miami FRD -circa May 1960,

SECRET


--- Page 5 ---
SECRET

Betsy Palmer
Page 2
Office of Security/Sergio Arcacha Smith 4¢:3oo4

8, Memo dated 28 Septembar 1967 from Donaven 2, Pratt
Subject: Garrison Investigation - Queries from Justice Department

Questions prepared by Deputy Assistant Attorney General/ Criminal Division.

A. During 1948-56 period of his association with CTA, what
services did Clay Shaw perform for agency?

(Shaw submitted information on international trade which was i

incorporated into 8 reports -- East German directory of firms

engated in such trade; a Czechoslovakian Trade Exhibit; foreign

exchange problems in Peru, etc.

B. What was his remuneration? DCS has to supply this information.

€. What were his contacts:

(Contacted by DCS representative in New Orleans seven times 1cka,
twice 1950, five times 1951, nine times 1952, once 1953, twice 195k,
twice 1955 and twice 1956.

C. What was reason for cessation of relationship? Files dont!
answer - DCS must furnish answer.

Questions about Sergio Arcacha Smith - same memo.

A. What was his exact relationship with Agency? Never a direct
one. Miami FRD headquarters may have mentioned CIA sponsorship to him.

B. What was Agency interest in and support of FRD? Answered
above. In the CRC? Had direct access to and support of White House and CIA.

C. CIA interest/support of Crusade to Free Cuba Committee?
No record - wheck with WH/COG .

Questions about Gordon Novel - same memo. Wo CTA connection with Novel or
his attorney, Steven Plotkin or his former business partrer Rancier Blaise
Ehlinger.

Questions about Jack Ruby - No CIA relationship or file.
David Ferrie - No CIA relationship
Richard Rudolph Davis - No CIA relationship
Alvin Beaufouef - No CIA relationship
Guy Banister or Hugh Ward - no CIA relationship
White Russians - no - see pp. 716-23 W Report
De Mohrenschildt - no

Is CIA tapping Garrison's phone - no

Marine training site at Atsugi was removed from the U-2 area to which the
Marines did not have access,

SECRET


--- Page 6 ---
Se

SECRET

Review of Files - Manuel Hay y Rivero
DCD Documents. -
May 2, 1978

1. Memo dated 24 Oct 1962 to Chief, Contact Division, from Chief, Sen
Francisco Office
Subject: Suitability of Manuel Ray and Miro Cardona for Important
Roles in a Possible New Cuban Government

ony

Information received from'Dr. [Robert North) Professor of Political Science 9¢

at Gtenford University}janu long-time source of exceptional value. Piort: qT

visited in Miami and Contacted about 25 former Castro supporters representing

a broad political gamut. br forth) got the impression from many of the
oxCubans that they suspectea hey of being a "possible Communist sleeper",

orthjreluctant to pass along this information, because accusations were
very broad.

2. Infomation report dated 16 July 1962 and Zarlier °8
Source: Cuban National (Alien Filef #a-12570921}}who asked for an
interview on occasion of first contact with CIA.

Cannot vouch for his bona fides. Had credential indicating membership in
branch of revolutionary army's intelligence service, now in exile in U.S.
and maintaing connections with colleagues in that country.

A friend of his reports plans to assassinate top Castro leadership in Cuoa.
To be done by poison -- "Clostridium Botulinum" which is strong, odorless,
and tasteless. Takes about 12 days to kill. About See would do the job.
Waiting for next visit of major delegation from a Communis? country --~
dinner in honor of the occasion should bring together most of the important
members of the regime and that is when the attempt will de made.

2. Cable dated Oct. 3, 1961 - WA orn WOR 4902 Suprort (Trevis) info u/s
Branch from Daniels. Source is Ernesto Dezaldo\- cuban lawyer now
living in New York City. Stated the MRP in Havana is far less radical than

under the leadership of Ray, who has been completely discredited in recent
months. Primary purpose today is (a) assassination of top leaders in Castro
regime and (B) sabotage of important industrial and government installations
in Havana. srength of MRP in Hevana estimated to exceed 1,000 -- success
measured more in terms of fund raising ability and blowing up of buildings.

3. Information dated June 4, 1961, Subdject: Underground Student Leader
Comments on Post-invasion Cuba. Reporting officer talked with

ISIDRO BORJA, on the leaders of DRE. Borja says top DRE members in jail
or in a friendly embassy in Havana but said new leaders have been selected
and will resume sabotage activities shortly. Thought tne underground could
restore tension in Cuba in 3-4 months. However, said outside help needed
to get rid of Castro. Claimed that prior to invasion, is was possible to
ouy almost anything in Cuba from Castro officials -- they were tainted by
corruption. Since Castro's victory at Day of Pigs, his popular support is
estimated to be around 80-85%. Most support is out of fear because the
people believe he will be in power permanently. Borja said DRE outside of
@uba working hard for release of former leader, Alberto Muller from prison.

SECRET


--- Page 7 ---
: SECRET

— Betsy Palmer
te od ditaneoy
DCD Documents - Manuel Ray y Rivero re |

Page 2

4, Memo to Acting Chief, Contact Division dtd 20 May 1064
From; Chief, Miami Field office
Subject; Alleged "New York Times" Publicity Build-up for Manolo Ray

Hal Hendrix, Scripps-Howard L.A. correspondent believes WY Times publicity
vuildup for Ray in full swing. Tad Szule reporting Ray's war movements from
Miami. Also with Szule is close friend, Henry Raymont of the Times.

Hendrix said Times playing up Ray while downplaying Artime and Gutierrez
Menoyo. Think's Times exaggerating Ray's plans to take teams of highly
trained guerrillas into Cuba, and that Ray's "yar" is little more than an
MGM-type New York Times production so far.

SECRET


--- Page 8 ---
STS Winner en caccaneanei ates aes TAR Str aeSS ee

a 8 EC R ET Betsy Palmer

Leis 0eg7

Review of Manuel Ray y Rivero Files, Volumes I - VIII

March 29, 1978
Volume I Undated to September 1960

I Cable suggests that an offer of financial assistance to Ray's wife
and children from CIA rather than through the FRD may pay large future
dividends. Family to arrive circa September 1960.

2. Cable to Director .
From: MASH
19 September 1960

Increasing suspicion RAUL CHIBAS a Castro plant. Since exfiltration by
KAPPES, CHIBAS has laid low but back in picture as representative of RAY.
Common knowledge that CHIBAS brought KAPPES out of Cuba, but should be
noted that KAPPES has since been in and out of Cuba three times with

no apparent difficulties.

CHIBAS' sources of information:
Mason in U. S. government
Manuel de Jesus and Bender as FRD representatives
Nino Diaz as Alianza representative
Don Hogan Kappes as Alberto Fernandex representative.

This should get a good picture of the U.S. anti-Castro activities.

3. Summer 1960. Ray very actively recruited to become FRD member.

CIA considered him an important political asset. RAUL CHIBAS, Ray's

assistant, spoke for him with U.S. authorities. Urged strong organization
inside Cuba before outside help could be effective. CHIBAS meets with
Bender 9/7/60, says he is in favor of FRD but completely committed to

Ray and would check with him.

4, 27 September 1960.
Memo to Western Hemisphere/4 Chief
From: Rudolph E. Gomez, Acting Chief, WH .
Subject; Approval from State to Include Manuel Ray Rivero in the
FRD Complex

At a 20 September 1960 meeting, Ray's name was suggested for inclusion
in FRD and State desired to look further into his background. Ray was
discussed again on 9/27/60 with Mr. Divine who further conferred with
Ambassador Mallory same day and Mallory approved Ray's inclusion.

D+ September 29, 1960 cable from MASH to WHO indicates MASH somewhat
doubtful about Ray's feelings toward U.S. and continued dealings with
this group needs further policy consideration.

vos i a restricted CI/0A folder on Ray of this 201 file held under
: S514 .

Ask about -- documents sent for microfilming in July 7, 1967.

UGFA 12222 3 November 1963 201 239298

6. Ray granted Provisional Operation Approval (POA). on 25 October 1960.
(form says, Green list attached 104591)

SECRET


--- Page 9 ---
—— SECRET Betsy palmer

Volume I + Manuel Ray dit49e90n
Page 2 eI Reh

7. PRQ Part 2 1659 c8551h
Section I Contact and Development

Woodrow C. Olien met Ray October 1958 when Ray was head of Civic Resistence
Movement in Havana. Three clandestine meetings were held prior to o¢

1 January 1959, attended by Olien, Wallace a. Growery, [Ignacio Mendoza { (Rc
member) who originally introduced Olien to Ray. After 1 January 195977 Ray
given important post in revolutionary government and Olien has seen him
only twice since, Olien poising as political officer to State Department.

Section II of PRQ states Ray is friendly to U.S., once having received
a gpant for special study there. A dedicated, patriotic Cuban, opposed to
Communism but taken no active part in combatting it.

8. an undated, unaddressed letter from Antonio Gonsales Mora, Jr. --«-

P.S. Says Joaquin Sanjenis appears to be a person in whom CIA has great
confidence. Linked to Artime conspiracy. Responsible for all "inter-

Cuban" intelligence matters. Is a "shady character" -- gangster background --
gives impression of mental retardation. Not kmown as individual of any
importance, but he is! "An inexplicable affair"

9. PRQ Part 2 (contd)

Section VI -- Subject has definite political action potential, ia
& pro-democratic official of government who is not in sympathy; with aims
of international Commnism and who is interested in strengthening ties
between Cuba and U. S. robably would never consent to agent status, Sut
could by persuasion and argument ve encouraged to influence policies of
his government along lines compatible with U.S. government policies.

Section XIV -- Information in PRQ Parts I and II were obtained from
file research and personal contact with subject.


--- Page 10 ---
SECRET Betsy Palmer
Review of Manuel Ray y Rivero Files, Volumes I - VIII
March 29, 1973 : ~

Volume II

October 1, 1960 - November 22, 1960

As of 21 November 1960, MRP organized as follows:

Manuel Ray ~ Chief
Raul Chibas - Sepeial Assistant to Ray
Juan Esteves Ramires - Secretary
Ramon Barquin - Military and Intelligence matters i
Cisneros = Chief of MRP in Cuba
s~ |
1. 10/4/60 Cable fromffondon\claims that new Cuban resistance group
organized under Ray and has 400-500 men in Las Villas Province. Not
part of FRD but in touch with it.

2. 10/7/60 Cable from Havana. AURELIANO SANCHEZ ARANGO has withdrawn
from FRD. JUSTO CARRILLO and FELIPE PAZOS will be integrated into Ray's
MRP. VARONA wishes to Join, also, but Ray insists VARONA return to
Cuba to do so.

3+ 10/12/60 Cable to Director. RAMON BARQUIN claims CARRILLO and ARANGO
are going to boycott FRD Executive Committee and sabotage its work.
Barquin planning to join with Pazos » Ray, Chibas, MERO and QUEVEDO to
form a new frente and then request union with FRD. If accepted, Barquin
would become military head. If Barquin does not get U.S. government
support for this plan, he will return to Cuba to try to overthrow Castro
and win election on an anti-Yankee platform.
: Ze

4. 10/17/60 contact report fron: Wallace A. Parlett ~

Subject: Meeting with JUAN ESTEVEZ and JORGE BERUPF, 10/13/60
Cubans said Ray's group will not lower themselves to answer "Fidelismo
without Fidel" charge and let their actions speak for themselves. MRP
is highly disciplined and feel the majority of Cuban people favor thir
platform. Its leaders are interchangeable. If Ray comes out of Cuba,
Chibas or Estevez could go in and take his place.

5. 10/24/60 Memo for files
Subject: Representative of Manuel Ray to Professional Groups

ENRIQUE HIRAM GUTIERREZ y RODRIGUEZ (dob 5/20/31, Havana) travels
frequently to Puerto Rico on architectural business. Also frequently
enters U. S. at Miami. Represents Ray's organization to various pro-
fessional groups in Havana. Also serves as courier to Miami.

6. DRE information. 10/24/60 cable states MULLER reported receiving
letter from ANTONIO GARCIA, DRE representative in Cuba that organization
is going well but needs funds and material aid. MASH asks Mueller to
get details of Garcia's "groupos de accion" and details of organization.
MASH gave Muller $500 for Garcia. Muller is concerned about Manolo Ray

SECRET

yf
%



--- Page 11 ---
j
$

w 10. 10/28/60 Memo for Record

File review, Manuel Ray

Volume if of xviii Att419F2 4
Page 2

whom he says is gaining strength in Cuba. Says students eager to join
active group and will go to Ray if DRE can't get help soon.

T+ Provisional Operational Approval granted to Ray on 10/26/60.

«x 8+ 10/26/60 Cable to Director from Havana reports Ray held MRP meeting

on 10/23/60 and made following statements: ;
t
a. MAJOR WILLIAM MORGAN had been very helpful to MRP - responsible
for obtaining most of their weapons.
b>. In four months, MRP will have 20,000 militants throughout Cuba.
Organized now in all provinces except Pinar del Rio. Invasion
could not take place for 4 months but FRD still in favor of
earlier date.
Ce CARRILLO and ANGEL del CERRO have left FRD and now with MRP

MRP urging Ray to escape Cuba and they feel it is only a matter of time
until he is picked up and executed. MRP manifesto will be released this
weekend.

9. 10/28/60 Monthly payments of $4CO approved for Ray's wife in
behalf of Bender group.

Subject: Conversation of CARRILLO anf (PAUL J. MANSCN': Chief, MASH
Economic philosophy: When FRD first formed It was attacked by RUBIO
PADILLA as "Fidelismo without Fidel." Now FRD saying same thing about -
MRP.

wil. 11/5/60 cable to Director from MASH

Verona tells HUNT that he received information that Ray wanted to leave
Cuba and was to be exfiltrated clandestinely by Bender group.

2
12. 11/8/60 Memo for Record -[Jobn D. Peters
Subject: Contact report on meeting with ROGELIO GONZALES

Gonzales considers Ray highly dangerous. because of his ambition to play
prominent role in Cuban government after overthrow of Castro. Thinks he
poises threat to Varona's authority inside Cuba. Ray appears to have
support of middle class, politicians and professhonals. Should Ray join
FRD, Gonzales thinks he will still operate on a unilateral basis while
seeking to supercede FRD with MRP.

13. 11/11/60 Cable to Director from JMASH

Ray arrived Tampa morning of 11/10/60. Mash officer staying with him
until surfacing date which depends on safe arrival from Cuba of two other
individuals. They are the last of the HUBER MATOS escapee group known by
Ray to still be hiding in Cuba.

SECRET

Fes



--- Page 12 ---
To tern e ennt teineRRS gaL ees Rea RRAMRNheN in

$%*

“

SECRET Betsy palmer

Review Of Manuel Ray 444 ane
Volume ii of xviii 22 72.082,5
Page 3

1s. 11/14/60 cable to Director from MASH.
Ray to surface at press conference scheduled for 11/16/60 in Miami.

15. 11/17/60 cate to Director from MASH

On 11/15/60,] Parlete] alies Bender met with Ray in complete privacy. ;
“Unquestionably, thé youthful, softspoken, unassuming, almost humile Ray’

is a natural leader of highest intellect, deepest sincerity and convistion."
Ray's political posture doubtful as far as U.S. government acceptance is
concerned.

Explained to Ray the U.S. government's desire to have all Cuban exiles
unified in their efforts. Ray says MRP does not wish to reinstate 1940
constitution. Provisional government of 30 honorable Cubans would be
established and elections held 18 months thereafter. Castro laws passed
at beginning of his regime to be promilgated. State would regulate

private investment and wtilities would be nationalized.

Ray wants to keep MRP "lean and hungry" -= each member to have specific
responsibilities and feel important to revolution.

Ray asked for permission to start a fund drive in Cuba and U.S. Also
asked for $10,000 by next Wednesday -~ Bender made commitment.

[ro tett}vetteves net result of meeting was establishment of private MRP-
eS. link and door remains open for some kind of relationship with PRD. -
Ray agrees to discuss this with Miro Cardona. of all the groups being
supported, FRD, MRP and MRR are most significant. All Cuban groups seem
to be looking to Bender group to show a preference before joining one of
the above three. How long current flexibility can be maintained is
problematical.

"16. 11/21/60 Memo for Record

Subject: Meeting with King and Esterline on subject of handling
MRP, 11/18/60 -

Consensus was that Ray did not politically represent ampthing to cheer
about. Writer felt MRP opposed to joining FRD and recognized need to
control MRP and wean it away to the extent possible from its leaders.
Could be done by controlling financial and military support. It was
agreed in meeting with Mr. Barnes that financial and military support
for MRP be channelled through FRD.

17. 11/23/60 Contact Report; Meeting with Ray and Chibas in Nyc, 11/22/60
Ray says MRP has contacts at Isle of Pines with two garrisons and can
expect about 750 men to desert Castro at proper time. CAPTAIN CAPOTA is
contact with Ray's group.

Ray's people also in contact with commander of prison where Huber Matos
is incarcerated. Matos believes PADILLA, the prison commander, would assist

Senecr


--- Page 13 ---
Trt rea rane nt Ie Bnet IR Om He esane manatee

. SECRET Betsy Palmer

File review of Manuel Ray
posume ii of xviii aang?
Page L Rg t

him in an escape. Ray interested in single operation to get military
defectors and free Matos. Wants to effect plan on 11/27/60.

Ray wants assistance from U.S. << military information and supplies.

18. 11/24/60 cable to Director from JMASH i
Meeting with AMCHIRP-1 on 11/23, revealed he had information that MRP in
Havana had capabilities to blow up power plant and TV stations in Havana --
a diversionary tactic planned to coordinate with Isle of Pines operation.
Ray expects Isle of Pines operation support about 12/15/60.

* Notation about Cable: "Operation Unity" is to create dramatic show which
* will demonstrate that Manolo Ray is wrong when telling contacts in U.S.

that his group is the only one Capable of action."

19. 11/24/60 cable to Director from Havana.
Operation Unity involves MRR, MDI, OA, 30th of November Group and MAR (not
MAR of PEPIN RIVERO).

MAR and OA groups to blow electric cables in Regla area. MDC group, at
same time, to make assassination attempt on CARLOS RAFAEL RODRIGUEZ at
University of Havana. :

20. 11/30/60 Cable to Director from Havana

JULIO ANGEL METRE advised planning to travel to Miami 12/1/60 escorted by
Brazilian amhassador to Panama. Accompanied by ambassador's wife. MESTRE
will be introduced to Ray and will offer services of MDC to Ray at that
time. Mestre says plan is approved by "DR. UCAS" (JOSE FERNANDEZ BADUE)
MDC coordinator in Cuba.

SECRET


--- Page 14 ---
SECRET Betsy Palmer

File Review - Manuel Ray y Rivero Volume ITT of XVITI
March 30, 1978

December 1960 - January 1961 atetgeoy

1. Cable 12/6/60 to.Director from Gold
Ray contacted by ‘WeiSinger| and made statement that Isle of Pine's

operation failed in his opinion because Bender failed to forward paper
to Havana with key to operation.

2. 12/8/60 Cable to Director from WAVE

Ray advised Wlesinge™| he is departing for Washington same day to visit
ERNESTA BETANCOURT of OAS and others. In New York on 12/9 to contact
Raul Chibas. Return Miami about 12/11/60.

3. 12/23/60 Cable to Director from Havana indicates Ray wishes return to
Cuba as soon as possible and asks that OLIEN make arrangements through
his official channel. Doesn't want Cubans in WAVE or Cuba to know of
his return.

-4. 12/22/60 Information. report from U -S. citizen, free-lance writer and

Part-time sugar broker ‘(DONALD’ HOGAN ~

Says Miro Cardona has accepted teaching position in Puerto Rico effective
early January 191. Is disgusted with bickering among anti-Castro Cubans
and will sit on sidelines for time being. Is partivularly opposed to
Ray -- program is too Marxist and Ray is an opportunist.

5 1/16/61 Information Report from U.S. national in a U.S. governemnt
agency. Source had contact with DR. GUILLERMO SALAZAR SANCHEZ, former
Cuban ambassador to Switzerland and DR. SERGIO ROJAS SANTAMARINA, former
Cuban Ambassador to United Kingdom. Salazar said he had heard from a
reliable source that Ray was not a bona fide defector and still acting
on behalf of Castro and is a member of the "Blue Legion". (no further
explanation. )

Dr. Salazar mentioned group.called "The Ten Unknowns" who are key figures

in making Communist policy in Latin America. (Ray not implicated as
one of these).

SECRET


--- Page 15 ---
SECRET

Betsy Palmer
Review of Manuel Ray y Rivero Files, Volumes 1 - XVIII (202.-239298
April 6, 1978 44449823

VOWUME IV - February 1, 1961 - March 31, 1961

i. Operation Approval granted for Ray's use as a political asset on
7 February 1961

2. Memo to WH/4?Security, From WH/4?CI .
Subject: Eloy Gutierrez Menoyo Group '
Date: 23 February 1961

Ray pressuring Mr. Droller to have four individuals freed from McAllen
Detention Camp who belong to Gutierrez group. Ray claims they are
members of his group and have been most active against Castro regime
in Cuba. They are as follows: ASENCIO, Suarez, Lazaro
LESNIK, Menendez, Max DPOB 8 Sept 1930,
Vueltas, Las Villas
PORTA Bolanos, Gustavo
REDONDO, Gonzalez, Roger

36 Cable to Bell, from JMWAVE
Date: March 1, 1961

Artime advises that Ray's group opposed to banning Commmnist Party and
in favor of “nationalizing everything". Ray favors maintaining trade with
USSR, wants no change in present agrarian reform program.

4, Cable to JMWAVE from Bell
Date: March 10, 1961

INS 1s concerned over the increased news coverage of Ray's arrival in
U.S. and activities here. Afraid they will be confronted about Ray's
arrival (which was describad as "black" in another communication) so
JMWAVE asked to re-advise Ray that his story is that on 10 Nov 1960, he
danded somewhere on Keys in a fishing boat, made way to road where picked
up by INS patrol car, taken to WAVE area, examined, declared refugge and
released with admonition to ‘always keep INS advised of his address.

5+ Memo to S = Dr. Berle, From: ARA = Philip W. Bonsal
Subject: Recent Cuban Developments :
Date: March 16, 1961

Conversation with Jose Miro Cardona and Berle, reveals that Cardona has
misgivings about Ray and Pazoz and the MRP. Says Ray is bitterly anti-
American as well as probably totalitarian in his thinking. ge no longer
believes Ray has any considerable support inside Cuba. Qhinks Ray group
endeavoring to exercise influence in our govermment so as to be the major
recipient of whatever assistance can be obtained here. He is particularly
tbidddyed concerned about the role played by Felipe Pazos.

SECRET



--- Page 16 ---
—— | SECRET Betsy Palmer

Review of Manuel Ray files

Volume if of xviii

Page 2 Aste Oe ag

6. Field Information Report
Subject: Background, Character and Economic Concepts of Manuel Ray Rivero
Date: 16 March 1961
Sources: Dr. Oscar SALAS Marrero (paragraphs 1-11) Knew Ray in Cuba

Dr. Jose ALVAREZ Diaz, former Minister of Finance under Prio (Pg 12

Dr. Jorge BERUFF, former president of Banco de Desarrollo
Economico de Cuba, (pg 13)

Note: Cover note pencilled comment (The content is so biased and mixed
with untruth that it would be a disservice to the intelligence commmnity
to disseminate it.

Synopsis of paragraphs 1-11. Dr. Salas Says during his childhood Ray was

a Protestant but today is completely atheistic. Said Ray organized the MRC
against Batista and shortly after Batista'ts fall, MRC and 26th of July
Movement fused into one, and as soon as Castro came into power, control

of the organization was given to the Communists. Tells of Ray's association
with Castro and that he did not resign his position when his own brother

was renounced by Castro. Stated that Ray's rupture with Fidel was due

to the fact shat Ray opposed the idea of shooting Hubert Matos as a

traitor. Ray resigned his post but said publicly that he approved and
supported the Castro regime without any mental reservations. Says in
Cuban clandestine circles Ray is regarded as boastful, ostentatious and:
deceitful. Intimate friends of Ray feel that he is a man of anti-democratic
‘procedures, and does not like to take advice, even from members of his owm
movement.

Synepsis of paragraph 12. Dr. Alvarez said Ray was in favor of maintaining
relations with USSR and not making Comminist Party illegal. Said that
although Ray withdrew all these statements when threatened with press
coverage, Alvarez thinks they are representative of Ray's thinking and
would try to put ideas into practive if he ever came to power. Alverez

also mentioned Rays thinking on nationalization of public services,
socialized medicine, nationalization of banks, ete. ;

Synopsis of paragraph 13. Dr. Beruff said Ray well-intentioned with no
Communist tendencies. Cited 2a meeting at which the basic points of the

MRP platform were discussed and said that since Ray was in disagreement with
the others on most of the points, Dr. Felipe Pazos acted as chairman of the
meeting and Ray argued his case as a simple member of the group. out of this
meeting came a declaration of 14 points, including the nationalization of
the banks and public utilities.

On 9 March, Ray said that ideas attributed to him in paragraph 12 were not

true and part of a "campaign egainst him by Mr. Pawley of the Miami City
Transit Company".

SECRF

\
é


--- Page 17 ---
. NS) EC R E T Betsy Palmer

Review of Manuel Ray files
Volume i¥ of xviii ;
Page 3 41040" 39

7. Report dated March 17, 1961, Marked Urgent

"It has been reported by a very reliable source that Manuel Ray (MRP)

is bringing as an Adviser, Professor Fiterre from Habana University ~<

This man Fiterre is an undisclosed Commmist that has always openly admitted
and braged about being aCommnist.

8. Memorandum for the Record
Date: 27 March 1961 ;
Subject: Ray accepts appointment to Council; ----- t
Signed: Gerard Droller :

Miro was able to convince Ray to join CRC. Thus, as of 27 March 1961,
Council's composition isas follows: Chairman: Miro Cardona; Board of
Directors: Varona, Hevia, Carrillo, Maceo, Ray and Artime.

9. Memorandum for the Record
Date: 27 March 1961
Subject: Reported Anti-MRP Rally Promoted by Aureliano Sanchez Arango
Signed: B. E. Reishhardt

Julio Lobo reported that Sanchez is planning a rally in Miami, 29 March to
protest against the Ray/Pazos combine in the revolutionary council. Writer
says, obviously, such a rally at this time could be most damaging and some
attempt should be made to get to Sanchez to take the steam out of this
maneuver.

SECRET


--- Page 18 ---
SECRET

Betsy Palmer
Review of Manuel Ray y Rivero Files, Volumes I - XVITI

April 6, 1978

VOUME V = April 1961 - July 1961 4444009°

< 1. Cable from JMWAVE to Bell

Date: April 3, 1961
ree
Ray meets with Olien and said he was not as yet prepared to join ote:
Miro had welshed on commitments and while willing to accept Ray into CRC,
not willing to give him any voice in the Council. Olein apptempts to i
convince Ray he was doing great disservice to Cuban people by refusing to
serve within §RG.

2+ Cable to JMWAVE from Bell
Date: April 4, 1961

"To test actual MRP Capabilities inside request you inform Ray to hit
targets G, I and K during period 5-10 April. Attack target 0 ineluding
diesel locomotive engines immediately, Will forward additional targets if
Ray shows any capability."

3+ Letter to Hdiitor (Pencilled note: Propaganda, against MRP by Attime's
replacement Jose Manuel Hernandez Puentes received from QD Date 6 Apr 61.)

"I am a Cuban who still thinks that Cuba can be rehabilitated after the fall
of Castro. For this reason Many Cubans have been baffled by the list of
names now given as the saviors of Cuba for a Provisional Gove: rnment. Among
these are such notorious Castro followers as: Ray, Barquin, Pazos, Rufo
Lopez Fresquet, Chibas and others whose names remind us of an era of
mourning, persecution and misery."

4, Report on Manuel Ray received from Enrique Molinet, a road and airfield
construction engineer under Batista regime. Cover note dated 4/7/61.
Molinet. outlines his distaste for Ray, citing at the beginning his refusal
to leave Castro even after the questionable suicide of his brother, Rene.
After Ray was ousted from his Cabinet job, he continued to visit Castro,
occupying a prominent position in all Castro's public appearances. Said
that even before Castro, Ray was an active member of the Cuban Orthodox
Party, highly infiltrated with communists. Claims that when Ray in his
Cabinet position, indoctrinations Programs were held expousing commmistic
ideals. Also while Minister of Public Works, claims he (Ray) threw out
hundreds of employees without due cause and destroyed every successful
contractor that existed.

5+ Memorandum for the Record
Subject: Custody of Revolutionary Council, 19-20 april 1961
Signed: Robert F. Moroney 2
Date:.24 April 1961

Relates that on 19 april 1961, President Kennedy met with the six members or

FRD's Revolutionary Council where President expressed ris deep sorrow and
concern over the failure of the military effort (Bay of Pigs). Ray one of the

SECRET


--- Page 19 ---
— SECRET etsy ratner

Ke

Review of Manuel Ray Files
Volume v of xviii £144929-
Page 2 ue :

6. Memorandum for the Record
Date: 5 May 1961
Subject; Manolo Ray - Comments on his Anti-Castro Activities
Signed: Calvin Hicks ‘H/4/pM/operations

"Ray is balieved to have accomplished pratically nothing towards the effort
to overthow Castro. Instead, it seems that whenever we played with hist so-
called assets, we were burned. He is notorious for claiming assets or
operations, several days after some other group had already set them up or
Claimed them. Vhenever it came to producing and backing up his claims » he
always came up with excuses for not producing, rather than results. He has
always tended to try to take over other goups, rather than cooperate with
them, and when he couldn't take them over he would "politic" against them.
His actions all seemed to be directed toward making him the future power
in Cuba rather than toward overthrowing Castro. It is believed that Manolo
RAY is so far “left" in his thinking that he would be as dangerous (or more
so in the long run) to United States interests as Castro, if he ever got to
be the power in Cuba.”

T7.+ Memorandum for the Record
Subject: yddd7/d/X Relations with Manolo Ray and the MRP
Date: 2 June 1961 93
Signed:([James As: Noel} J

In a 12 May 1961 meeting, Ray promises to write a prospectus of his plans

for MRP within ten days. Not received by 2 June, but Ernesto Betancourt -
is asking for financial support for MRP activities. Tracy Barnes agrees
“with (NoeI\that no money should be given Ray until his plans are studies.

Ray is asking for support separate from FRD since Ray has withdrawn from
this group."{Noe]) further states in Memo, “««-I would like to pbint out the
security risks inherent in any arrangementy with RYA-BENTANCOURT-CISNEROS
trio. These fellows have had easy access to the white House and to the
Department, are notorious for their ‘planned leaks', will probably presume
all the Department officials they deal with are privy to the arrangement, and
before we know it the whole’ exile community will be well aware that we are
providing financial and material support to the RAY group."

8. Cable to Bell from Caracas -
Date June 8, 1961
On June 2, Venezuelas governemnt refused to issue a visa to Manolo Ray.

9. Cable to Director from Caracas;, dated June 28, 1961. re: meeting with
Jose R. Barbeito on 20 June in Valéncia. Barbeito claims was member of
MRP of Manolo Ray and took part clandestine activities Havana. Admitted
was communist "many years ago" but now completely opposed to Castro and
Communism.

SECRET


--- Page 20 ---
° SECRET Betsy Palmer

Review of Manuel Ray Files
Volume v of xviii
Page 3 44440

10. Intelligence Report
Date: 7-11 July 1961
Place: San Juan, P.R.
Source: Cuban Exile Lawyer
Evaluation: F-6

Report transmits information concerning activities, persons visited and
purpose of visit of Ray to Puerto Rico, terminating when Ray hurridely' left
Puerto Rico following press account that he had been removed as Coordinator
of the MRP.

Source said MRP leaders in exile believe Rays dismissal due to propaganda
and pressures by the CIA which brought about the impression that the obstacle
to receipt of help from outside (money, arms » etc) was Ray himself and that
oneé Ray removed, they would receive all types of help. ‘The exile leaders are
of opinion that it was also brought about because Ray was a divisionist
inasmich as he had abandoned Cuban Democratic Revolutionary Council.


--- Page 21 ---
SECRET

—oe Betsy Palmer
Review of Manuel Ray y Rivero Files Volumes I - XVIII
April 6, 1978

Volume VI = August 1, 1961 - June 30, 1962 11449234
care 2

1. Cable to JMWAVE from Director
Date: August 1, 1961

FBI conducting investigation on MRP and Ray and Director indicates he
needs to know purpose of investigation to respond properly.

E4 2. Dispatch from Chief of Base, JMWAVE
; Date: August 4, 1961
Subject: Debriefing of Father Bastarrica

. Father Bastarrica recently errived from Cuba as a political exile. Ata
luncheon meeting, he reported as follows:

MRP formed in Cuba around 26 July 1960. Organizers were Dr. Amalio Fiallo
Gonzalez, Dr. Antonio Fernandez Nuevo, Reynol Gonzalez, Humberto Perez Herrera.
All these men belonged to group called Accion Democratica. The name of MRP
was suggested by Raul Chibas and in itself it does not constitute a party
or group but rather a coalition of several small groups » which were the
following:

a.» The 20 May group, led by Manuel Ray

b. Accion Democratica, led by Dr. Fiallo

¢. Accion Verde Olivo, led by Dr. Rufo Lopez Fresquet

ad. 30 November Movement, led by David Salvador (never really joined)

e- Chibas' group with Jorge Beruff and Felipe Pazos

f. Dr. Valdez Pino, in asylum in Embassy of Peru and belonged

to Accion Democratica.

Father Bastarrica's opinion of Ray is that he had no way of judging whether
Ray is Communist or Marxist. Lacks quality of leadership because he
does not publically hold to a definite political, social and economic ideology.
He appears to agree with every person he talks to, never arguing with them
or opposing them, all of which shows he has no ideology and makes him a
very dangerous man. Is extremely ambitous for himself, with great desire
for power. ‘

. os
3. Memorandum for Chief, WH Division, dated 10 October 1961, fromiarren S.
Yauger;, Subject; General - Cuban Matters; Specific - Manuel (Monolo) Ray
‘Planning Board of Puerto Rico announced on 9 October 1961 that Ray has
accepted position as consultant to that Board. Board is an important agency
of Puerto Rican government, attached to the Office of the Governor. Has
broad powers over economic and social planning and is active in exercising
these powers. Ray to receive $12,000 per year. Ray presently in
Venezuela but expected to arrive Puerto.Rico within a week.

SECRET


--- Page 22 ---
SECRET

Review of Manuel Ray y Rivero Files 1444R29-
Volume vi of xviii oD
Page 2

Betsy Palmer

4. Cable to Director from JMHAVE, dated May 27, 1962 discusses front page
article in Miami Herald of this date by James Buchanan entitled "Miro fades
as Exile Chief: Three Latin Leaders Behing Ray". States that Ray has the
backing of Gov. Monoz Marin, Pres. Romulo Betancourt and former President
Jose Figueras and that Ray has taken over post with blessings of the U.S.

F urther states Ray's appointment as "Chief in Edile" came from underground
in Cuba according to Joaquin Godoy, Provisional MRP head in Miami. Article
credits Cubans in Miami with saying “new man in field" is Adolf A. Berle, Jr.
who has been special asst. to State Dept. and is also member of Pres.
Kennedy's special task force on Lantin America. Implication being that
Berle is running new U.S. sponsored Cuban effort. Release causing furor
in local Cuban colony.

Cable to JMWAVE from Director, 28 May 1962 states State Department spokesman
will state story without foundation at a noon press briefing this date.

d+ Iisting of principal persons in Puerto Rico with the MRP

RAY, Manuel ‘ PORTELA, J. Migues
PAZOS, Felipe CARMONA, Claudio

BARQUIN, (Col) Ramon ESYEVEZ, Jeromino
MELENDEZ, Juan BERGNUS

GELAVERT ALVAREZ, Gabriel

NODAL, Rodolfo PORTELA, Sara

6. On 9 June 1961, Ray transmitts a detailed study of a general program
designed to attain the liberation of Cuba. General Thesis states that

MRP believes that the strongest position for representation and canalization
of aspirations of the large majority of the Cuban people is offered by the
set of ideas and aims of the democratic left.


--- Page 23 ---
_—

\

ed SECRET Betsy Palmer

Review of Manuel Ray y Rivero Files, Volumes I - VIII
_ a ~ 11440235
April 2h, 1978. 1440035
Molume VIT __ July 1962 - August 1962_

1. Cable dated July 2, 1962 to Director from San Juan

Glear that Manolo Ray wooked upon with great favor by Puerto Rican
government. No evidence, however, that Puerto Rican government is
supporting the MRP, Believe record will show that while our past
contact with Ray has not always been happy one, it always revealing
of Ray's intentions. 4
2. Memo for Chief, Task Force W from Alfonso Rodriguez 12 July 1962

Subject: Manolo Ray Rivero

"Ray has indicated to WAVE sources that whereas he is not persona grata
with the Agency, he has important political connections in Washington and
is thus kept informed of much of the Agency's activities. Ray's new
organization is not to be military or engage in military thrusts against
Cuba because military activity is presently controlled by the Agency and
cannot be wrested from it at this time. Ray's new organization will
cooperate with the Consejo and attempt to move in on it with the ultimate
aim of taking over and dominating it."

3. Memorandum for Chief, Task Force W from Alfonson Rodriguez 25 July 1962
Subject: Manolo Ray Meeting in New York

Ray sorry he joined FRD prior to April invation. Let tide of time suck

him in and take him along. Obvious to him that show run in good faith but

bad judgment. Ray discusses hope that JURE will be long-lasting organization

in Cuba, Ray's political views ase assessed as democratically oriented, and -
_if he became ruler of Cuba, his greatest preoccupation would be with economic

progress. Rodriguez says Ray is not to be under- estimated. Commands

respect because he is well educated and has something to contribute,

4, Ray begins to give information about possible defectors from Castro.

Cable dated 25 July 1962 reports that Ray told Willard R, Nauman that

Armando Hart Davalos is a feasible target.
. former mgr., Kings Ranch, Cub:
43. Additional information to a July 1962 memorandum from Jack Malone’ (named

on interoffice route slip). Information obtained from difference sources

from persons close to Ray and their views are complete reliable. Ray did

Martinez Sanchez, who almost shot Ray after a Cabinet meeting. The sources
of information agree that’ Ray is not any different than Castro. Some of
them believe he may not have completely severed his relations with Castro
and think ke may still be in contact with him, Diplomatic relations were

\ suspended but recognition was not withdrawn.

@. Memo from Jack Malone, dated July 16, 1962 Cover letter addressed

to C. Mechens Says Ray's ethics are poor and he is capable of sacrifycing
his own kin and friends if such sacrifice turns out in favor of his personal
plans. Claims Ray is irresponsible and ignorant of present international
conditions and particularly of the Cuban social and economic reality.

SECRET


--- Page 24 ---
7 tena nme ttn AMMA A

— SECRET Betsy Palmer

Manolo Ray
Volume VII continued

Quotes Ray as having said, "When I was Minister of Public Works, we, the
inner circle of the Department, took a course in Marxist economics, and if
what we were taught is commnism, I mist say that communism is not as
bad as it is claimed to be." of

3 3

3 ; iw
8. Report on visit with Ray in Puerto Rico during first week of os
June, 1962, submitted by (Winterrowd | through [Walt Raymond } [Winterrowd }
states his general impression of Ray was a good one -- seems of be a thoderate,
intelligent man, a little given to hysteria and slogan-mongering. est,
quality is in his skill as an organizer !

9. Cable to Director from JMWave, dated Aug 15, 1962 DIR Cite WAVE 7062
Ray had meeting in Miami area ll or 12 August in which an informant says

Ray stated that he has arsenals in Venezuela and Cominican Republic, has

a Be26 plane, territory available for training in Costa Rica and has the

support through indirect means of U.S, Has invited journalists from New

York Times and Time Magazine to cover his announcement of the formation

of JURE.

10. Cable to Mexico City from Director, dated 6 August 65 says Ray plans

to travel to Central America late August or September and needs visitors visa
for Mexico. Says he has close acquaintance and wants to make personal

effort to recruit him or talk him into defecting,

CIA makes inquiries in an effort to obtain visa for Ray.

ll. Cable to Director from San Juan, dated August 20, 1962, Ray believes

Llanusa will defect but needs financial support, Jose Gelabert

to make pitch to Llanusa. Later cable says CIA willing to offer Llanusa
&

$5, 000.

12. Cable to Mexico City from Director, 23 August 1962 with directions

to proceed to procure visa permit but make every effort to conceal U.S.
connection. Ray had agreed in N.Y. meeting to make recruitment or defection
effort towards Cuban Ambassador in Mexico,

13. Memo to Chief, Task Force W from Alfonso Rodriguez dated 24 aug 1962
Subject: Operational Use of Ray Expenditure of Funds

Rodriguez feels beginning collaboration with Ray can be based on three
specific proposals: 1. creation of an intelligence network inside Cuba
2. creation of recruitment or defection capability
to assist our efforts in MEXT, RIO, SAGO, and MONT
3. immediate effort to recruit in place Carlos LEGHUGA
and Raul PRIMELLES.
Recommends paying Ray $84,700 over a six month period to begin this initial
operation.



--- Page 25 ---
Betsy Palmer

— SECRET

Review of Manolo Ray y Rivero Files - Volumes i- Xr

april 2k, 1976 441489.
Volume VIII - September 4, 1962 - December 27, 1962
Emer te te ~ December 27, 1962

1. Telegram Information Report (circa Sept. 10) Unevaluated information.
Ray in the U.S. 8-9 September. Intends forming new organization. Some of
those participating with Ray in this effort are Felipe Pazos, Raul Chibas,
Ramon Barquin and Justo Carrillo. Ray is of the opinion that nothing
will be done about Cuba in the immediate future as the President of the
United States is. fulfilling "an ezpedient of a political nature." Fowever,
there is an ally in the White House who has assured Ray that if he organizes
a purely revolutionary group, he will be heard.

2. Junta Revolucionaria Cubana
Declaration of Principles outline the following areas:
1. Cuban Reaffirmation - recognition of sovereignty of the people, through suffrag
2. Human Rights - human fraternity and social solidarity for all Cubans
3. Social Justice - equality of opportunity for education, work, homes, etc.
4, Economic Development - intense industrialization
5» Agrarian Reform - Cuban pesantry to own land he cultivates
6, International Relations - break with Soviet bloc
7. Restoration of Legitimate Property - not that under public power
8, Political Parties - Communist Party will be proscribed
9. Political Prisoners - immediate release
0. Elections - within 18-month period

@. Dispatch to Chief, Task Force W from Chief of Station, JMWAVE
Date obscured

C AMTERILL-1 provided information on Ray obtained from Silvia KOURTI de -
Pendas, a fellow student of Ray's at Instituto de Segunda Ensenanza #1 in
Havana. Ray never know to have sympathy for Commmist cause. However, one
of his good friends, Pedro Valdes Vivo, is active member of Communist cell
and a brother of Raul Valdes Vivo, now sub-director of Communist paper
“Noticias de Hoy."

3. Cable to Priority San Juan, Info: Priority JMMJAVE, Priority Mexico City
From: Director (Rodriguez originator) dated 9 Oct 1%2

-Admission visa not pauched 00 forwarding document will be in WAVE hands

10 October forjass ing to Ray. Lechuga is principal target in area of

Ray trip. Stress desire keep Lechuga in place in preference to defection.

4, Memorandum for the Record dated 8 October 1962 fronfPatrick I. Karniey J
Subject; Notes on Manolo Ray
In conversation with Iuis Laboy, Laboy said Ray does not have any
significant following among Cuban exiles -~ says Ray is honest person
completely motivated by patriotism but lacks qualities of a politician.
Says Ray is too blunt and even Cisneros is not happy with him these days.

Puertg Rican Police are apparently Canvassing Cuban exiles regarding Manolo
Ray. Tn [Sitn-1 Report, 54 dated 30 Sept 1962, he refers to fact that both he
and Fermin”Alvarez Silva were visited by officer of PR Internal Security Force
soliciting their opinions of Ray.

SECRET


--- Page 26 ---
- SECRET setey pata

Manuel Ray ar
Volume VIII continued 447302 39

5. Excerpt from Bohemia Libre 21 October 1962, page 85 Engineer Ray's
jatest Attitude

letter to magazine from Olga Hernandez, Santurce, PR - an exile
who believes Ray really a Commnist. Her reasons based on Ray's statements
to "El Mundo" on his arrival in exile that after Castro's defeat there
should be maintenance of cultural and economic relations with Russia,
maintenance of militia, mainenance of confiscated property, socialized ;
medicine, supervision of national schools and gradual supression of private
schools.


--- Page 27 ---
SECRET

Review of Manuel Ray y Rivero Files, Volumes I > XVIII
April 24, 197

Betsy Palmer

44144249
Volume IX ~ January 1963 ~ July 1963

1. Cable to Director from Caracas, dated Feb. 22, 1963

FRANCISCO SUAREZ QUINONES wishes travel to Maimi to attend JURE rally
2h February. In view Ref B (WAVE 2462) info that Suarez commmist and also Z
MRP member, DCM has asked if any info that Suarez was undercover agent for
MRP or if he may be double agent working for Castro. ;
@. Confidential Controlled Dissem. dated 3 June 1963
Title: Plan of Manuel Ray Rivero to Infiltrate the Ranks of the
Central Intelligence Agency cn

On 30 April 1963, Rogelio Cisneros reported on meeting of JURE exec. board
in.his home attended by, among others, Antonio Arias. During meeting,
..Cisneros said it was mentioned that Ray had issued orders to infiltrate a
trusted man into the CIA in orter to learn details of any plans with regard
to Cuba and if possible infiltrate this man into Cuba. Cisneros also said
JURE planning leaflet drop into Cuba which will include such matters as Ray's
Manifesto against the U.S. Government and against the CIA.

3. Cable to Director from Paris, dated 19 June 1963 477272

Ray in Paris - contacted by Jervay. Ray driven to airport by Alberto
Baez with whom Ray spent much time and who seems to be closest to Ray
among his. contacts in Paris.. Ray in Paris and Brussels for purpose of
‘tering Franqui and arce to -agents-in place, or defection. Also. Cabrera.
Ray convinced Gubans kgs? disillusioned with Castro. Asks for update of
list of personnel and addresses of all Cuban embassies.in Europe to be
passed to him in SantJuan® Soiree vin Raris, Wants to ve trained in
short wave system between himself ‘PNRUMBLE: 6 and station felt these
were good ideas and could be done.

4. Memo for the Record from Alfonso Rodreguez, dated 19 June 1963

Subject: Manolo Ray :
Ray's attitude towards CIA - feels that the Agency has in the past purposely
and actively attempted to destroy him as a political leader and has proof
of at least one CIA officer plotted with certain MRP officials to remove him
from the Mrp as a condition for CIA assistance to that organization.
Ray cannot be overlooked in the struggle for Cuban freedom. "-- of all the
Cubans I have met, he is the most purposeful, methodical, as well as the most
experienced clandestine operator..."

5. Confidential Controlled Dissem, dated 27 June 1963

Re: Creation of an Intelligence Corps within the JURE
feliable information from former Rebel Army member (F) active in clandestine
movements. JURE meeting gabout 30 March 1963 at home of journalist
Antonio Arias said JURE national executive board had created an Intelligence
Corps with JURE whose function was to infiltrate JURE members into various

SECRET


--- Page 28 ---
° SECRET Betsy Palmer

fits 0ed)

Volume IX continued

organizations operating in Miami, as well as into some of the agencies of
the U.S. govt. Said intelligence group would produce great results and
stated as an example the infiltration of the U. S. Army.

6. Dispatch to Chief, Special Affairs Staff from Chief of Station, JMWAVE

Dated July 22, 1963

Subject; Manuel Ray Rivero's Opinion of CIA (AMTAUP-2 source of info)
"During a conversation on an unspecified date, involving AMTAUP-2, Ray and
Rogelio Cisneros Diaz, Ray told Cisneros that they had to be very careful
with CIA agents because they were more dangerous than the Kennedy Administration.
The Kennedy Administration would end but the CTA agents always stayed, and
their memory was longer than the memory of elephants and they never forgot
or forgave. Ray told Cisneros that he feared CIA agents would try to
assassinate him because they were irreconcilable enemies."

SECRET


--- Page 29 ---
— SECRET

Betsy Palmer

Review of Files of Manuel Ray y Rivero, Volumes I - XYTIT
a ee SE OY YY nivero, Volumes I -

April 2h, 1978 41448249
Volume _X - August 1963 - September 1963

1. Memorandum for the Record from Alfonso Rodriguez, dtd. 2 August 1963
Subject: Meeting with Ray (27 July 1963 in Miami)

Ray to attempt a sabotage operation against the Havana power plant and wants
20lbs high explosives as well as 6-3 thermite grenades. Requested tha} the
Materials be cached inside Cuba (preferably) or in San Juan. Requested that
arrangements be made for Rogelio Cisneros to visit Guatanamo to visit his
brother to inform him of JURE plans -- Rodriguez says possibility remote.

Ray planning to visit Caracas and Costa Rica later if he has a visa from
Mexico. Purpose of trip is fund raising.

2. Cable from JMWAVE to Director #63249 dtd 22 aug 1963

Ray's Mexican visa forwarded WAVE by safehand Sept 62 and request it
be airmailed to Ray in Puerto Rico. Ray planning trip Costa Rica, Caracas,
Dom. Rep. and Mexico. Departing San Juan 29 August for first leg.

3. Memorandum for the Record dated 23 August 1963, from A. Rodriguez
Subject: Ray, Contact Report

Met with Ray in N.Y.c. on 19 August. Rodriguez recommends to Ted Shackley
that ammunition for JURE be cached near Florida Keys. Thinks it necessary
to help Ray this mich in order to measure his capabilities. Ray is having
a 25-foot boat outfitted in Miami area to be operational by about Sept. 10.
Will be used primarily for infiltration and exfiltration of personnel into
Cuba, Ray also says he has been offered a 210 ft. Corvette, flying a
Venezuelan flag and owned by Spaniards friendly to JURE. Said he could extend
operations along the south coast of Cuba for as much as 2 - 3 weeks with
this vessel. Ray was interested in whether or not KIM flights were to be
resumed into Cuba as he is hopeful of returning by legal means which would
not pose as many difficulties as present Mexican and Spanish air travel
conditions.

Ray says he hoped to soon penetrate the Cuban delegation to the U.N.

Said his contact with ambassador Lechuga, through a woman member of the
JURE, continues, but without significant progress. Lechuga is most
friendly towards her but does not wish to discuss any of his problems with
her.

Rodriquez recommends continuation of monthly (310,000 payments to Jure and
an additional $15,00 to cover cost of vessels to be acquired.-- total of
$25,000 monthly for 6 months.

4, Cable to Director from JMVAVE, dated 24 august 1953 #2322287

Ray Mexican visa waiver number 50844 issued 3 Sept 62 valid for six months,
hence now expired. Under circumstances, WAVE not mailing to Ray unless
otherwise instructed.

5. Cable to JMVAVE from Director, dtd 24 aug 563 Cite Dir. 63774 Please
air mail as Ray will need to procure new waiver,

SECRET


--- Page 30 ---
Yolume X continued

De

Ray
Mexi

SECRET Betsy Palmer

Litsneag
Cable tofsan Jose, Caracas, Santo Domingo
From; Director dated 31 August 62 ~

cp

departing 29 Aug. on trip to first three addees.
can visa waiver for travel there later, Purpose

|Mexico Cityk JMWAVE

Attempting renew
of trip to solicit

political backing, raise funds, tighten JURE organization, steeamline
communication and establish take-off points for operations against target.

Te

Cable to Director from JMWAVE dtd 7 Sept 63, Ref

WAVE 3895 +

Reported conversation with Ray's sister-in-law wherein she stated Rey

visi
into

ted her home on 30 August to say yoodby. He was
Cuba and would not see her for some time. Said

going to de infiltrated
he was not in accord

with certain U.S. officials on Cuban policy and has no confidence in U.S.

ability to liberate Cuba.

by RFK to discuss G@uban situation.

8,

N.Y.

9.
who

Said he had refused two invitations extended

Document transfer and Cross Reference dtd 10 Sept 63f UFG=03590 “]
Ray arrived secretly in Miami from Puerto Rico, had secret meeting with
Manuel Quiza Docal, LDR of Cubanos Libres, in which Quiza officially

connected his organization to JURE for all action.

C, to purchase c-4 explosives.

Later traveled to

Cable to Director from JMWAVE dtd 11 Sept 63, report from AMTAUP-2

spoke with Rogelio Cisneros on 6 Sept. Cisneros

stated Ray departed

for Costa Rica on 5 Sept to interview President Orlich. Said on Ray's
last meeting with RFD, the private secretary of President Romulo Betancourt

was present.

Cisneros said JURE objective is to have different prominent

figures in Latin American governments witness promises made by U.S. govt.
Cisneros said JURE not obligated to report military or political plans to
CIA but CIA obligated to deliver to JURE all military enuipment needed to

figh

t Castro. Nelivery of equipment will be on high

to JURE boat which will proceed to Cuba.

LO.

Cable to Director from JMWAVE, dated 6 Sept 63.

seas from a CIA boat

Elania Germania (Bernal)

de Paula reported she learned from her brother-in-lay, Manuel Ray, that he
had recently been in Europe negotiating arms purchases in Belgium. Contact

man
ll.
C Lire
Ray

living in Mexico.

for purchase of Col. Ramon Barquin.

Cable to Director from MEXI dtd 27 Sept 1963 +

’.

0301

s 2 approached by Julio Lanter on behalf of Ray and JURE. Want to
start military operation against Cuba using Mexico as a base. Lanier says
receiving money from Venezuela. I-2 is a CIA agent - Cuban citizen

activity.

Mexican station wants to keep him clean of overt exile



--- Page 31 ---
— . . . SECRET Betsy Palmer

Volume XI continued - page 2

14440845

T. Cable to Director from JMWAVE, dtd 11 Oct 63

On October 1, Cisneros tells AMTAUP

-l that Ray to visit Betancourt later in

week to report on status of JURE negotiations with U.S. and promises made
to Ray by RFK during recent interviews.

3. CAble 172301Z 17 Octobar S23 to Director from JMWAVE.

On 15 October 1963, Jose (Gomez) Rodriguez, aka Cabeza, JURE member tells
AMTAUP-2 that CIA officials from Washington, D. C. coming to Miami to
finalize agreements with JURE. Also said JURE would never tell CIA exact

landing sites on Cuban coast,

9. Cable to Director from Mexico City, 26 October 1963

Secret 260035Z
Dir WAVE Cite Mexi’ 6677

Ref A Mexi 6455 (not sent WAVE) (IN 36021

REF B HMMA 22285

Uj (also recd 2235)

JURE representative Julio Lanier pressing LUTAMID}2 to obtain Mexican
visas for Luis Giun Figueredo and Rogelio Cisneros Diaz who want to inspect

plane of Ref A.

Fast action needed or L-2 will not be able to meet Cisnero and have an "in"
with JURE group for purpose of coverage of JURE PM activities Mexi. Lanier
will set up meeting in Miami or San Juan,

10. Dispatch to Chief, Special Affairs from CS/JMUAVE, dtd 21 Oct 63
Information received from AMTAUP-2

Ray to arrive in Miami 26. July, in

secret, because he wanted to hold private _

meetings to discuss militar; effairs with action groups in Miami, Met at ~
home of Rogelio Cisneros Diaz on 28 July. Met with Armando Alanis Angulo and
asked him to Join JURE. Alanis former Chief of Fiscal District of the
Treasury in Camaguey Province. Ray says he has organization inside Cuva

but needs personnel on outside with which to operate. Claimed to have 200

weapons in Miami,

On 18 August, Cisneros meets with Alanis and Luis Aguiar (who telongs to
Alanis group). Talked of plans for Aguiar's men to infiltrate Las Villas
Province and open a JURE organization, .

Alanis officially joins JURE on 20

August 1963 and received Cisnero assurances

they will get financial help from JURE.

ll. Caole to Chief, Special Affairs Steff from IMUAVE/CS dtd 22 Oct 1963

5, On. 30 September, Ray departed

for San Juan from Miami » after having

visited Venezuela, Costa Rica, Honduras and Panama to gain support for

operations against Cuba. /

12. Cable 79065 on 29 October 1953,
October 31, 1963 to meet Ray in St.
arises.

Willard R. Nauman will arrive an Juan
Thomas. Do not plan contact unless need

SECRET


--- Page 32 ---
SECRET etsy ratses

41440245

13. Field Information Report dtd 26 October 1963

Ray in Miami 10/26/63 to meet with Ernesto Betancourt, former MRP and now

Washington, D. C. delegate of ELC. May have met in an effort to merge =LC
with JURE. Ray feels need to tbe in Cuba in 90 days - hurricane Flora has

seriously damaged Cuba and this is an opportune time.

Yolume XI - continued - Page 3

14. Memo for Record from Alfonso Rodriguez
Subject; Meeting with Ray in St. Thomas on 31 October and 1 November 1963
Discussed JURE plans to vegin operations inside Cuba vy end of December.

15. Cable dtd 16 Nov 1963 to Director from JMVAVE indicates Ray teking meetig
vessel REX within 50 miles of Cuba - cargo, 600 lbs. demolitions.

15. Cable dtd 18 November 1963 to JMWAVE from Director confirms understanding
that all dates mentioned in Rules of Engagement this operation are moved up
two days. Thus, WAVE will begin operation by caching materials and departing
scene by 1200 on 25 November 1963. ;

17. Cable dated 3 December 1963 to JMNAVE from Director indicates Ray
involved in infiltration plan, Operation BOLA, and CIA doubts his story
as to why he couldn't complete mission -- said low on gas.

18, Payments to Ray 21 June 1963 - 5 December 1963, totalled $107,925.00
No payments in November.

19. Memo for Record from Alfonso Rodriguez, dtd 13 Dec 1963

Meets with Ray in N.Y.C, 12/6/63. JURE ship failed to pick up materials
deposided on Roncador Cay on 25 November 1963. Ray had no full explanation
for failure. Low on gas theory doubtful as ship did arrive a Puerto Limon
on 27 November as scheduled. -- Ray doubts this story, Alternate date of
20 December set up, embarking from Puerto Limon, Costa Rica this time.

SECRET


--- Page 33 ---
— 8 £C R ET Betsy Palmer

Review of Manuel Ray y Rivero Files _- Volumes I - xVIII

May 1, 1978 16840249
Yolume XII_- January 1964 - February 1964_

4
|
|
|

1. Intelligence Information Cable, 4 January 1964 - information from
Carlos Hernandez Hernandez, an =xecutive Member of Brigade 2506 veterans
Association said the Brigade rejected a proposed alliance with JURE on
December 7, 1963. Brigade is apposed to Artime, but more opposed to Ray.

2. Identification provided by CIA for Ray in his attempt to infiltrate
; Cuba. Request made 6 January 1964 - Ray to use identity of Juan Cardenas
< Mendez.

3. Cable to Director from JMWAVE, dated 8 January 1964, Dir Cite WAVE 0106

C amot-84 said he learned from newspaperman Abelardo (Garcia) Berry that Ray
had met in Paris with Carlos Franqui Mesa to propose that Franqui join
Ray's organization, that is, sector of "Betrayed Revolution", Garcia
believes that in order to obtain Franqui's defection, Ray told him about
alleged plans of U.S. to overthrow Castro in which Ray was to play a
prominent part. Garcia further believes that Franqui's "falling into
disgrace" in Cuba is a trick of Castro and Franqui.

- 4, Cable to DIR from JMVAVE, dated 8 January 1964 states that Governor Munoz
Marin, Puerto Rico, pledged to give Ray double any amount Ray raised on a
bond sale by JURE to buy guns. JURE has large quantity of arms in P.R,
under protection of the Governor,

3+ Cable to DIR from JMWAVZ, dated 14 January 1964. Cisneros said JURE

has military training base in Costa Rica under command of Julio Cesar Alonso,
Military Chief of JURE. All JURE boats now at Costa Rican base and also
arms which had been in Puerto Rico. Said JURE leaders do not plan to

to work in Miami area or anywhere else in U.S. because they are afraid

CIA will seize their military equipment.

6. Cable to DIR from JMWAVE, dtd 16 Jan 1964 - Amtaup/2 reported that
hdd d / deh d /dddbld Julio Cesar Alonso replaced as chief of Costa Rican
military base of JURE because of his failure to go on a scheduled operation.
(Check to see if this was the aborted mission of 25 November 1963)

6. Cable to DIR from JMYAVE, dated 30 January 1964, amtaup/2 reported
conversation with Sergio Sanchez and Rogelio Cisneros. Cisneros said ¥BI and)
INS, Puerto Rico, picked up JURE arms and explosives cached at Cajon de
Muerto. Before JURE could pick cach up, it was discovered by a fisherman who
advised authorities. JURE boat found and searched, but not retained as they
nak thrown antiaircraft guns overboard. Governor of P.R. called newspapers
and informed them he thought Castro had cached the arms in order to overthrow
P.R. Cisneros says he did this to sidetrack FBI and TNS investagations and
to eliminate possibility Ray's activities would be revealed. Gisneros

said JURE boat located in P.R. and registered in Panama in name of person

who is extremely close to governor P.R. and bitter enemy of CIA. dmtaup/2
questioned by Governor P.R. was trusted by Jure, to which Cisneros replied
that Governor primarily nationalist and enemy of U.S. imperialist politics

and therefore an enemy of CIA. S ECRET


--- Page 34 ---
SECRET Betsy Palmer

Volume XII - Manual Ray sae
Page 2 1444 1- AS

S. Cable to DIR from JMWAVE, dtd 31 Jan 64 - Article in Miami Herlad about
the discovery of arms cache in Puerto Rico confirms accuracy of Amtaup/2
reporting that Ray involved in robbery U.S. Military installation and that
Governor Marin is misleading FBI investigation. WAVE believes the C-3
explosive found in cache was provided Ray by WAVE as directed by Hdgqtrs,
but WAVE did not provide any weapons. WAVE will tell loegal FBI that they
know nothing regarding background of cache discovery and assume Hdgtrs will
coordinate case at Wash.D.C. level with FBT.

T. Intelligence Information Cable, dated 4 Feb. 1964 = reliable source

Says RAY expected in Caracas, Venezuela middle of February 1964 to establish
@ guerrilla training base for JURE in venezuela. Will be a regional center
used by JHRE members in Venezuela and Panama, (Likely that if Ray succeeds
in setting up camp, it will be with tacit consent of Betancourt government.
Field Comment). Ray claims he will be inside Cuba by 20 May 1964,

8. Cable to DIR fram Panama City, dated 9 Feb 1964 states JOSE MARTA PUENTE
BLANCO, Panamanian/Cuban, DOB 17 July 1930, Havana, Cuba, keft Panama City
for Caracas on 8 Feb. He is possible Castro agent and Panama City would
appreciate information re his activities in Caracas and/or subsequent travel.

9. Memo for the Record, dtd 12 Feb 1964 from alfonso Rodriguez
Subject: Meeting with AMBANG/1

ELC, according to Ray, was now disolved and became a part of JURE on 17 Jan.
1964. This brings to JURE the best former rebel army officers in exile and
should give JURE a military background and support sew nd to none in the
exile community,

Comments: AMTAUP/2 reports have indicated Cisneros activities and statements
are directed against the CIA. Rodriguez discusses Amtaup/2's reporting with
Tony Sforza and Warren Frank. If Cisneros is in fact directing a program
of denigration against the CIA, suggest agency follow the activities of
Dionisio Suarez Esquival, who reportedly has been selected to carry out such
a program in various Latin American univerities.

1°. Cable to DIR from Panama City, dated 22 Feb, 1964. The PUENTE anac
brothers have been under some suspicion since their arrival in RACY following
their release from Cuban prison as result of intervention of Thelma King.
Part of suspicion is a result of activities of their brother, Jorge, still
in Cuba.

a

SECRET


--- Page 35 ---
SECRET

Betsy Palmer

Review of Manuel Ray y Rivero Files - Volumes I - XVTIT
eS mes  AVTET

May 1, 1978 a
Volume XIII - March 1964 - April 1964 441440243

1. Memorandum to Acting Chief, Contact Division, dated 6 March 1964
From: Cincinnati R.A,
Thru; Chief, Detroit Office
SUBJECT: Castro Type Subversion Iikely/Manuelo Ray Dangerous Exile Leader
now in Puerto Rico
REFERENCE: CR-64-2 and WH-15904

Architect, Nocholas Quintana, residing in Cuba, told the following to a Mr.
Rapheel Katzen, consulting engineer in U.S. Manuelo Ray is in Quintana's
opinion more dangerous to U.S. than Castro. Ray is not a Soviet type
Communist according to Quintana, but his socialism is so extreme and his
anti-U.S. feelings so deep that he considers Ray a dangerous exile leader,
at least to the U.S.

Manuelo Ray is known to be of interest to the local FBI (Cincinnati).
(Check -- is thts~¢ix-memo? )

2. Memorandum for the Record, dated 16 March 1964
From; Sidney P. Di Ubaldo
Subject: Contact Report, Meeting with Ernesto Betancourt

Betancourt has known Ray for several years and admired him through all various
seasons of their relationship. Betancourt impressed with Ray's organizational
talents and talents as an engineer... Says Ray an effective and judicious
personality and appeals to Cuban exiles of various stripes. Betancourt
expressed a fear that Ray, in his zeal, might commit himself to such tight
timing that he would be forced to undertake action at a disadvantageous
moment.

Di Ubaldo comments that if Betancourt was leading him on in an attempt to
sell Ray to him, it was done with a "subtlety to woich I am definitely not
accustomed",

3. Cable to DIR from JMWAVE, dtd 17 March 1964. Cisneros told AMTAUP /2
that CIA had ordered personnel of AMWORLD (artime's group) boats to fire on
JURE boats and therefore Cisneros had instructed his crewmen to fire on

_ AMVORLD boats wherever encountered. <.;

Cisneros had meeting at his home on 15 March, attended by Armando Alanis
Angulo, Dunney Perez Alamo, Jose Puente Blanco, National Chief JURE youth
and member of JURE national Executive, and AMTAUP/2. Cisneros related that
Romulo Betancourt told Ray in Caracas that Betancourt will work in favor of
JURE. Puente confirmed this. Betancourt promised to arrange urgent meeting
with U.S. officials in Washington to get promise from them that CIA would
not sabotage any of JURE's planned operations.

SECRET


--- Page 36 ---
SECRET Betsy Palmer
Manuel Ray - Volume XIII

Page 2 441440859

4, Cable to DIR from JMWAVE, dtd 28 March 1964 - AMTAUP /2 spoke with
Blas Enrique Comas Castro, captain of JURE boad VENUS which is in Puerto
Rico. Said Cisneros and Ray recently arrived in P.R. from Caracas and said
Venus would be used to infiltrate Ray into Cuba in a few days.

avrauP/2 said Armando Alanis Angulo said he was leaving Miami on 30 March
for new JURE base within 6 hours of Miami. Said base under responsibil “uy
of Dunney Perez Alamo and himself. Also said Ray had chosen Venus to make
trip to Cuba and Venus armed with 20MM gun, four 50 Cal and one 20 Cal
machine guns.

2. Cable to DIR from JMWAVE, dtd 28 Marbh 1964 - amrauP/2 reports that
Alanis, Perez and Antonio Arias Gonzalez, JURE members, are dissatisfied with
Ray's organization because they had now been forbidden to eritieize U.S.
govarnment policies, and the fact that they were allowed to have a training
camp near Miami indicated that Ray is accepting CIA aid. Cisneros claimed
the main objective of JURE was to keep U.S. govt. entertained with the
training base set up in Miami area and that departure of JURE members to
infiltrate Cuba will be outside U.S.

6. Accounting of funds received by Ray, from June 21, 1963 - April 8, 196h,
show a total expenditure of $217,924.28 by CIA.

T. Memo for the Chief, WH Division, dated 14 April 1964, from Alfonso
Rodreguez - Subject: My Meeting with Ray on 13 April 1964,

gssenee of Ray's plans: 1. Two teams expected to go into Oriente Province
this week,
2. Ray will turn over JURE contact with us to
Cisneros, effective 23 april.

Ray's immediate objective once in Cuba will be to initiate systematic,
continuous bombings of strategic and nonestrategic targets. Power plant in
Havana, major refinery and aquaduct in Santa Clara are immediate objedctives.

8. Cable to DIR from JMVAVE, dtd 26 April 1964. — AMTauP/2 reported that

JURE training base opened near Tampa, Fla? for 30 men and planning to set
up a base in Dominican Republic.

SECRET


--- Page 37 ---
SECRET Betsy Palmer

File Review, Manuel Ray y Riyero_- Yolumes I = XVIIT_

May i, 1978 :] 4a 8) 25,”
Volume XIV = May 1964 4qtthioo.

1. AMNORLD Meeting in San Juan, P.R., 2-5 May 1964
Subject: Ray's Plans oe
Submitted by Henry D. Hecksher, wH/sa/SO/EH

Ray's plans to infiltrate Cuba by 20 May were discussed at meeting. Questions
about Ray's financing of Puerto Rican conference and ability to store arms
and engage in training activities on U.S. soil were raised by AMYUM/Z9(MRR)
Hember). He volunteered to tell .Hecksher where arms could be found be
Hecksher (‘quickly dissuaded him from divulging further details" at which
point AMYUM 19 commented that GUERTLER had reacted in a similar way when
offered facts and figures about Ray's activities. Artime stated he would

not put it past Ray to go into hiding in a secure place while pretending

to be in Cuba.

2. Cable to JMWAVE from DIR, 7 May 1964 ~ after looking at AMTAUP material,
it is obvious much of conspiratorial talk in JURE is for internal consumption
only, the purpose being to protect myth that JURE is independent as basically
hostile to CIA. In a desire to obtain proof of any anti-CIA or U.S. govt.
activity by Ray, urge every effort to check accuracy of AMTAUP /AMOT reporting
and follow through for any overt manifestations of many allegations made.

3. Memo for the Director of Central Intelligence, from Richard Kelsn,
DD/P, dated 13 May 1964. Subject: Plans of Manuel Ray and the JURE to
Infiltrate into Cuba.

Helms says there is no question but that Ray seriously plans to enter Cuba
sometime in May 1964. JURE has 6 teams ready to infiltrate -- a total of
27 men. Ray hopes with aid of 40 men, he can demonstrate that resistance
is possible and that Castro can be defied,

4, Cable to DIR from JMBAVE, , dtd 20 May 1964. andrew St. George, on
assignment with Time-Life, left Miami 13 May with JURE elements for
rendezvous with Ray.

3- Memo for the Record dtd 20 “Nay 1964, from Samuel Halpern
Subject: JURE Purchase of Arms

Chronological resume of reports reaching WH/SA desk regarding attempted
purchase of azms by JURE in El Monte, California.

A. Revenue officials queried CIA re its Imowledge of certain
arms being handled by Juan Erquiaga Aizcorbe in L.A. area

for shipment to Florida. ot/sa denied knowledge.
Discussion about 20 May 1964,

SECRET


--- Page 38 ---
8 Seeman ae cn ann neanrentinane mene thbet.

——

~ SECRET

14440252

Betsy Palmer

Manuel Ray - Volume XIV
Page 2

B. Rogelio Cisneros calls Rodriguez (fdJ¥dy47) on 20 May to advise
him certain arms being manufactured to JURE specifications
in El Monte and being investigated by U.S. Treasury. Cisneros
says JURE has invested $50,000 in these weapons being manu-
factured bu Knuson (sic) Manufacturing Co.

c. Rodriguez Lid dob di bhdd J tells Cisneros this is pretty sad
situation that JURE must make use’ of Costa Rican, Venezuelan
and other L.A. connections or they were going to get “clobbered”
in U.S.

Ce. Halpern and Rodrigaez advised Mr. FitzGerald of the above. xe
agreed agency could not assist JURE in this matter. On 20
May, Mr. Bowdler of St. Dept. notified of the matter, and
Deputy Chief, WH/SA advised.

=. Joseph O'Neill of OGC called on 20 May and informed that JURE
was involved but agency did not want Revenue called off its
investigation because of the "autonomous" nature of our
relationship wit JURE.

6. Cable to DIR from JMUAVE, dtd 22 May 196k, Sender states that the
manner of Tad Szule in an office visit on May 21 and new confident tone
expressed by Cisneros conveyed feeling to cable sender that Ray has made it
into Cuba,

7. Cable tp JMWAVE from DIR, dated 23 May 1964. Request Reuteman advise
AMCARBON/1 that he has checked with hdqtrs and that Ray is not receiving
CIA support. Reuteman should trace history of intimate relationship of
AMCAPE/1 with Ray noting that since Bay of Pigs, AMCAP!/1 has been serving,
in effect, as a public relations man and loggyist for Ray. Further explain
to AMCARBON/1 that AMCAPE/1 must be credited with single-handedly placing
entire Cuban nation on alert and causing withdrawal of masses of conscripted
workers from cane fields merely by articles playing on theme of threat of
infiltration of Ray and a few men. Tell AMCARBON/1 that CIA would not
become party to Ray operation knowing close relationship with AMCAPE/1,
particularly since latter well known to be less than friendly to CIA.

8. Intelligence Information Cable, dtd 26 May 1964. Cisneros says that
as of 23 May 1964, no contact has been established with Ray but Cisneros
believes he has reached Cuba.

'

9. Intelligence Information Cable, dtd 23 May 1964 - Cisneros says Ray has
not as yet been able to infiltrate Cuba and will make dygffdy attempt night
of 28 May 1964. Cisneros says vigilance by U.S. authorities over activities
of JURE reps. in Florida making support of Ray's effort extremely difficult,

SECRET |


--- Page 39 ---
— SECRET

Betsy Palmer

File Review of Manuel Ra: Rivero - Volumes I - XVIII oo
NS SO EE 44440859
May 1, 1978

Volume XV = June 1964

ee

Ll. Intelligence Information Cable, dtd 30 May 1964 - information from
Rogelio Cisneros Diaz - as of 30 May 1964, Ray had not entered Cuba. Boat
to be used in final infiltration developed motor trouble. JURE reps were
taking all out effort to go to Ray's aid with replacement for boat and an
additional supply of drinking water.

2. Cable to SMUAVE from DIR, dated 2 June 1961, Ref: vaya 7218 (in 954516)*
Please note similarities rumor reported Ref Para 2 and statement attributed
to Rogelio Cisneros that CIA had instructed AMWORED boats to fire on JURE
boats per WAVE 3691 (IN 41477). Is this significant?

* Artime's followers authorized to attack any of Ray's or Gutierrez's men
on high seas. ,

2. Cable to DIR from JMJAVE dated 3 June 1964 } stating that Ray and Andrew
St. George were among the individuals arrested oy the British near Cayo Largo.
(Location of Anguilla Cay also used in cable), Detainees taken to Nassau,
Tom Dunkan, Life photographer, also in group.

3+ Cable to DIR from JMUAVE, dtd 4 June 1964 - avTaup/2 reported that Ray's
organization going to make press statement that Ray's failure to enter
Cuba was fault of CIA,

4, Cable to DIR from JMUAVE’ dtd 6 June 1964 reflects feelings of Cuban
exile community over Ray's failure to enter Cuba.

a. Ray made a fool of himself by taking a girl and two non-Cuban
newsmen with him, none of whome adapted to rigors of suerrille
warfare,

b. British and U.S, participated in Ray's capture

Cc. Whole thing was a publicity stunt which went wrong.

d. Enrique Huertas jubilant over Ray's disgrace, out feels it is
a loss of exile prestige and harbingers bleak and hepeless period

e. Dr. Antonio Maceo says many have lost faith in Ray for lack of
accomplishment this past year.

f. Ray is laughing stock. Those who had hopes now feel he is
only an ambitious politican not will to keep promises.

&- JURE members confused and undecided over how to defend Ray.
Alanis and Zarraga wish to remove their. followers from JURE.

h. Cisneros states to AMTAUP that Ray will accuse U.S. govt of

4 treachery for cutting off economic aid one month ago and for
searching his home, automobile and offices (Cisnero's? )(Photostats
in volume xIv)

SECRET


--- Page 40 ---
Betsy Palmer

Volume XV - June 1964
Page 2

5. Memo for the Record, dtd 9 June 1964, from Alfonso Rodreguez
Subject: Possible Plans of Ray

Opinion of Rodriguez that Ray will attempt asap to mount another infiltration
effort. He is relatively certain JURE has or can procure a small craft
Capable of making trip from Florida to Cuba. He also thinks that dithdy
dtdkdrydd/df Ray "would be willing to publicly give the lie to the TRE
magazine article of 12 June 1964,

6. Cable to DIR from JMVAVE, dtd 10 June 1964 - re-canvassing of exile
community reveals Ray's prestige at near-absolute low point. Trend is
tendency to ignore Ray completely. Information that JURE in considerable
dissension. Threats of various factions to withdraw unless Cisneros dismissed
and national board reorganized,

T. Memo for Record, dtd 12 June 1964 from Samel Halpern
Subject: Information from the British in Answer to Questions Re;
Identify of American Who Allegedly Paid Manuel Ray's fine in
Nassau,
o>

{Chris Phillpotts|called 12 June to say Gov. of Bahamas had replied to our

query as to the identify of American who allegedly paid Ray's fine in Nassau.

(see TIME of 12 June 1954, page 48 -- alleged CIA paid). Governor skated

he had seen no such figure and to best of, nis Imowledge, there was no such

person. "I of course did not tell [Chris Bai lipotts that we knew the identity

of the American as reported to us by Rogelio Cisneros of JURE,”

8. Memo for Record, dtd 12 June 1964 from Alfonso Rodriguez
Subject: JURE telegram to TIME Magazine

Protest falsity of information published by TIME re: capture of Manuel Ray
and his group. False that a CIA ship participated in any phase of operation.
Also false that a CIA individual paid fine -- the $84.00 was sent to JURE

by an American citizen at request of one of his employees.

9. Cable to DIR from JMYAVE, dtd 27 June 1964: According to aMFast /6,

Ray informed Pepe Catillo (Jose Garcia Valdez) their departure date for Cuba
would be July 1. Boat to be used is unnamed Rybovitch rented in It. Lauderdale.
Ray planning to stay in Cuba about 15 days.

10! Memo for Record, dtd 29 June 1964, from alfonso Rodriguez
Subject: Establishment of Base Abroad; Manuel Ray Rivero

On June 22, the Special Group agreed "no monies would be forthcoming,

specifically a requested $25,000, until he ceased" all activities from U.S.
mainland. :

SECRET



--- Page 41 ---
SECRET

File Review - Manuel Ray y Rivero - Volumes I - XVTIT
May 2, 1978

Betsy Palmer

1144085, ;
Volume XVI _- July 1, 1964 - August 28, 1964

1. Draft on Manuel Ray by Alfonso Rodriguez dtd 6 July 1964

After his failure to reach Cuba during May 1964, Ray believes he must go

into Cuba as soon as possible. Within JURE, according to Ray, his detention
by the British is viewed as an unfortunate incident. Ray said some JURE
members considering demonstrations before British embassies and consulates.

2. Memo for the Record dtd 7 July 1964 from Alfonso Rodriguez
Subject; Tad Szule Relationship with Manuel Ray

Rodriguez questioned Ray's using newspaper correspondents as emissaries to
departments of the U.S. govt. Ray stated that Szule took it upon himself
to speak about matters related to assisting Ray. Rodriguez says it would
be wrong to assume that Ray is controlled by Szule but Ray "undoubtedly
knows that Szule has worked hard, first with President Kennedy and now, for
him and his interest. This cannot but influence Ray."
2. Intelligence Information Memo, 14 and 15 June 1964 Cay OF

Source: Bese Alvarez Sola, private chauffeur of Rogelio Cisneros Dist) }
JURE's national executive met 14/15 June to discuss crisis within the
organization concerning Cisneros. Dr. Raul Chibas Ribas stated that if

Cisneros not removed from his position, Chidas would make public his
resignation.

3. Memorandum for Director of Central Intelligence, dtd 9 July 1964
From: Dismond FitzGerald, Chief/WH Division
Subject: Chronology of Concept of Autonomous Operations and
Summary of Financial Support to Manuel Artime

Attachment A is listing of origin, briefings, discussions, and approvals by
appropriate policy levels of the concept of autonomous operations and
specifically support to Artime. Chron clearly shows that from the very
beginning the problems inherent in autonomous operations were clearly
stated at all times by the Agency and that appropriate policy levels were
kept fully and regularly informed of the status of autonomous operations.

Attachment B contains summary and breakdown of financial support for Artime.
Summary states that, "From June 1963 through 30 June 1964 the Agency spent
$4,933,293 in support of the Artime operation." Fixed monthly subsidy is

Pad

$225,000. .

SECRET


--- Page 42 ---
— SECRET Betsy Palmer

Volume XVI - continued 111185:
page 2

Origin of Autonomous Operations

Integrated Covert Action Program for Cuba, approved by Higher Authority
in June 1963, provided for "support of autonomous anti-Castro Cuban groups
to supplement and assist in the execution" of other courses of action.
Concept was first voiced in Sept. 1962 in Walter Rostow's proposal for a
"Track Two" approach to Cuban operations. Parallel to regular CIA-
controlled Cuban teams, CIA wohld extend financial aid and some advice and
guidance to independent and uncontrolled Cuban leaders such as Manuel Ray.

Rules of Engagement incorporated into June 1963 progran,
+ "It is the keystone of autonomous Operations that they will ve

both inside and outside Cuba acting in consonance.

2. The effort will probably cost many Cuban lives. If this cost
in lives becomes unacceptable to the U.S. conscience, autonomous operations
can be effectively halted by the withdrawal of U.S, support; but once halted,
they cannot be resumed.

3. All autonomous operations will be mounted outside the territory
of the United States,

4. The United States Government mist be prepared to deny publicly
any participation in these acts no matter how loud or even how accurate may
be the reports of Ux Ss. complicity.

5. The United States presence and direct participation in the
operation would be kept to an absolute minimum. Before entering into an
operational relationship with a group, the U.S. representative will make it
clear that his Government has no intention of intervening militarily, except
to counter intervention by the Soviets. 4n experienced CIA officer would be
assigned to work with the group in a liaison capacity. He would provide
general advice as requested as well as funds and necessary material support,
He may be expected to influence but not control the conduct of operations.

+ These operations would not de undertaken within a fixed time
schedule."

4, Article from New York Times, Wednesday, July 15, 1964, bylined Tad Szule
"Ray Said To Leave For Cuba Landing - Castro Foe, Balked in May, Reported
on Way Again,"

5. Cable to DIR from JMBARR, dtd 15 Jul 1964, M/V True with Manolo Ray
and crew returned Key West area --- had motor trouble.

1
6. Cable to DIR from JMWAVE, dtd 18 July 1964. Ray's latest misadventures
trying get into Cuba mid-July greeted with relative indifference majority
Cuban exiles Miami area.

7. Wireservice prinout - Miami, Flay, July 24, 1964. Three exile groups
withdrew from Ray's JURE today protesting that Ray failed to make good
his promise to enter Cuba to reactivate the anti-Castro underground.
Spokesman was Jesus Dieguez of the Revolutionary National Assembly.

SECRET


--- Page 43 ---
SECRET

as Betsy Palmer

Review of Riles = Manuel Ray y Rivero - Volumes I - XVIIZ

Volume XVII - September 1964 - February 1965 4141740857
May 2, 1¢737 7

1. Memo dtd 1 Sept 1964, subject: AMTAUP-2 Production
"Chief of Reports Comments: It would appear that AMTAUP-2's reporting on
JURE matters have been generally reliable."

2. Autonomous Operations - Operating Plan

Activity: AMBANG

For the Period: 1 October - 31 December 1964. Total of 375,000 paid
to effect move of JURE activities from U.S. territory and as a final payment
to JURE.

3. Intelligence Information Cable, dtd 9 Sept 1964 oS
Source: ;Jose Garcia Valdez, aka "Pepe Gatillo":
Subject: Plans of JURE leader Manuel Ray Rivero to depart Miami for an
Undisclosed Location.

Ray asked Garcia on 9 Sept 64 to take him, St. George and Mirta Borras on
trip to unspecified destination. To depart on JURE catamaran.

4, Memo for the Record, dtd 11 Sept 1964 from Alfonso Rodreguez

On Aug 24, 1964, Rogelio Cisneros called to report his resignation from JURZ.
Stated Ray incapable of directing both political and military activities.
Cisneros thinks Raul Chibas will soon also resign. Cisneros said Ray not
prepared for ill-fated May attempt into Cuba and Cisneros thinks Ray had
believed he could arrange for CIA to take him into Cuba. "Ray is politically
unformed --- politically that which he last read", Cisneros further stated
that he believed Ray had planned his entire return-to-Cuba angle with President
Kennedy and the presidential elections of November 1964 in mind. According to
him, Ray planned to make JURE. and Ray outstanding ~— liberal and democractic
exile group with the thought that prior to the 1964 elections, Mr. Kennedy
would have to do something about Cuba. With Kennedy's death, according to
Cisneros, all of Ray's plans went awry. Rodriguez expresses to Cisneros

that this seems like a far-fetched possibility and Cisneros admits he got

idea out of thin air, but said theory widely held within Directorate of JURE,

5+ Memo for the Record - draft - dtd 22 Sept 1964 - Alfonso Rodriguez
Conclusions "I recommend we give Ray what he asks and close the JURE books |
for good. “ff Ray is succesful in Cuba he will not need our help, if he is
not, our help won't do much good.

"He is honest and at least the money will largely be spent for the
purpose he wants to achief .°

"Whatever Ray may ever say, he was treated the way he asked to be
treated. We have played the game in a manner beyond reproach."

SECRET


--- Page 44 ---
— SECRET

Popes XVII - continued 414 4028 53

Betsy Palmer

6. Erquiaga Arms shipment to JURE episode.

Cable from[San Jose] DIR CITE [S705)7152, REF: DIR-63886

1-1 Aa1S

Please pass to Asst. Sec. Mann from Ambassador Telles: "I saw President
Orlich and Minister Quiros Sasso on 18 November and conveyed reference position.
The President was visibly shaken to learn that US government was not in-
volved in this arms shipment, After some discussion with Minister Quiros,
President Orlich requested that we not issue license for AMBANG-1 shipment.
President Orlich made clear he would be happy at any time to undertake
action such as this if US government wanted him to. While he does wish
see Cuba free he inclined to agree with US position Re Hit and Run raids
undertaken principally for publicity sake. President Orlich's decision
based on (1) relatzation that he would not be doing us a favor and, (2)
further realization that CRG would be hard pressed to explain such a
$70,000 purchase of arms if it became a campaign issue in 1965."

SECRET


--- Page 45 ---
. SECR ET Betsy Palmer

File Review Manuel Ray y Rivero, Volumes I - XVIII
river, Volumes IT - XVIII

Volume XVIII - March 1965 ----- ------ 144400259
May 2, 1975

1. Memo dtd 18 November 1965 to: United States Secret Service
From: Deputy Director for Plans
Subject: Ray, Rivero, Manuel Antonio aka; Ray, Manolo

In response to a telephonic request of 15 Nov. ‘1965 for a name trace

on Ray. CIA files contain voluminous information fron sources of
varying reliability re: Ray who is well know to Intelligence Community
as a prominent anti-Castro Cuban exile leader and head of JURE. If par-
ticular info is desired, please specify.

2. Memo dtd 6 Dec 1945 to Secret Service from pp/P gives 2 1/2 page
standard bio information on Ray.

3. Memo dtd 15 Dec 1965 to Commissioner, INS from DD/P

Subject: Roige Cerezo, Jose

(A 12 399 923 TC)

According to CIA files, information dtd 4ug 1963 from a Cuban emigree source,
Roige was designated chief of intelligence by National Direction Acroad of
JURE. Source said intelligence group created in Marc 1963 on orders of
Manuel Ray for purpose of infiltrating JURE members into various organizations
which operated in Miami area, as well as into agencies of U.S. govt. Further,
that in April 1963, Ray had issued orders to infiltrate a JURE member into CIA
in order to learn details of plans regarding Cuba. JURE also intended to
drop leaflets into Cuba of a derogatory nature regarding U.S. govt. In-
cluded in these leaflets was Subject's manifesto against the U.S. govt and
against this agency.

h, Ltr. dtd June 2, 1966 from Dr. Julian Gallo to Harry (Mahoney? )

Gallo is contact with Ray in Puerto Rico and trying to discover the names
of Ray's contacts in Cuba. Ray, apparently is seeking a Mexican visa fron
Gallo and unhappy that it did not come through. Refused to reveal names
or addresses to Gallo and would not give information about where his radio
broadcast tapes were to be sent for transmission into Cuba.

2+ Memo for the Record, dtd 21 June 1966 from Charles Anderson

Met with Ray on 28 April 1966. Anderson said in general Ray had less
information on the "purge situation that T did.¥ Ray. said relatives
of Gustavo Arcos in P.R. had telephone contact with Arcos family in Cuba,
about 25 April and that Arcos still in prison but charges against him
were thin. "( This means there was at least one more telephone call than
we knew of previously, and this has probably served to increase the pressure
on Arcos)." Anderson tells of ais concern and strong interest in Arcos on
the chance that Ray might assume Arcos had been CIA agent. Doesn't know
if Ray will construe remark this way but it seemed like an opening "to use
an important exile channel as a possible deception mechanism.”

"I believe that later in the summer it might be a good idea to have
another talk with AMBANG to keep up with exile thinking, and feeding xore

deception thoughts."
SECRET


--- Page 46 ---
SECRET Betsy palmer

Yolume XVIII continued
Page 2 11410459

6. Intelligence Information Cable, dtd 23 June 1956
Source; Qualified American Observer

On 15 June 1956, Rafael Garcia-Bango, Cuban exile in Spain, received call in
Medrid from Ray in P.R. regarding Ray's plans to assume power in Cuba.
Garcia-Bango told Ray it was essential he come Madred before 25 June

and return to San Juan in order to talk to a member of Cuban delegation for
10th Caribbean and CenAm games in P.R., prior to return of delegation to Cuba.
Ray agreed to do so.

Ray enthusiastic over possibility of overthrowing Castro in next several
months. Knows Garcia-Bango has bad reputation but feels he could prove
useful. Also useful would be Garcia-Bango's brother, Jorge Garcia~Bango
Dirube, who has more respectable reputation. Ray also state that he had
received indirectly a message from Jose Llanusa Gobel and c onsiders him
a potential ally.

7. Harry Mahoney debriefs Ray, described in Memo for the Record dtd
& July 1966. Mentions Julian Gallo at this time and Ray indicates he
knows and respects him.

8. Memo No. 771, 1 Sept 1966 for: Chief, OPS Cuba/‘WH Division/DDP
Attn; Mr. Harry Mahoney, Subject: MIG-21. Attaching communication
from DIA authorizing $100,000 should MIG-21 operation succeed. Funds
to come from Air Force escrow fund now held by CIA.

(Note: Other memos refer to MIG which Ray said he knew a Cuban pilot
would fly out of Cuba. Ray never comes through with any information
that is usable, and finally says he cannot contact pilot)

9. Cable afd Jan 69 CITE WH/Miami 2233
cas

nef] Caradds Luco

AMOT reports on 9 Aug 63 indicating Ray plans to dissolve JURE and hold a
Congress of Cuban exiles in 1969 to create a new organization to fight
Castro. Ray working with Haitian groups and hopes, if new invasion of
Haiti successful, he will be. granted operational bases and radio station
in Haiti.

10, Memo dtd Feb. 8, 1971 to Director, FBI from DD/P indicates that CIA
has no current operational interest in Manuel Ray Rivero.

SECRET


--- Page 47 ---
SECRET ——setay pater
April 5, 1978

Review of Manuel. Rey Rivero files 11741076.

Assortment of documents not in files at time review began on 3/29/78

a a 16~10
1. 10 June 1966 Dispatch to Chief, WH, From (Chief of Station, [Santo
Domingo} Subject: Haitian Exile Activities in the Dominican epublic.

a

[aomery-1 provided information on Haitian exile activities. On May 30,
1966 fay was taken to a meeting }y¥ Godefray. Moscoso at the Hotel
Comercial . (with)

was taken to meeting by Gerard Max Lafontant, a Haitian Communist

At the meeting, Lafontant told Moscoso that Manolo Rey had obtained
explosives for him to use in the first invasion against Haith and that
Rey was now living in the Dominican Republic. Lafontant described Rey
as a former collaborator of Fidel Castro, but was not now on sepaking
terms with Castro. He said the Commmist-oriented lth of
June Revolutionary Movement had on one occasion accused Rey of being a crg
Kor ket agent, but this was not true. Rey can obtain explosives within
24 hours after the request is made.

2. Cable to Director from Hunt, August 25, 1960 states that Carrillo advised
that FRD should keep an eye on new anti-Castro group being formed by Raul
Chibas and Manuel Ray, Marcel Fernandez, Julio Durate and Jose Pepin

Bosch. Chibas told Carrillo that Miro would follow Chibas line which

would be neither join nor fight FRD but help if necessary. Bosch

financing Chibas and Miro with initial credit. Results negative when
Carillo invited new group to join FRD. Carrillo feels if new group

succeeds, it will try to draw in Feliue Pazos and Ramon Barquin.

(Note date of cable)

3+ Dispatch to Deputy Chief, WH/SA from Chief of Station, JMWAVE

dated 14 April 1964 in Mexico, D. F. Lengthy and very rambling

letter which, among many other things, states the story about Manuel

Ray being closely associated with ALBIZU CAMPOS and friendly with

Puerto Ricans who were working on the rennovation of the White House

and the group that tried to assassinate Truman. (Pencilled notation

of A. Rodriguez -- "Who is AMSHOT/1? Could he be agent provacateur?
What is his access? Can we take him seriously?) Although postmarked

in Mexico, AMSHOT apparently still in Cubail¢t not a Cuban citizen - wife
in U.S. Trying to get a Mexican Visa.

4, Cable 21 May 1964 or information report.

On 21 May 1964, unidentified members of JURE stated that

Manuel Ray Rivero entered Cuba successfully on 17 May 1964

and is still there. He departed from an unidentified embarcation point
near Cuba at 3 am on 17 May and reached his destination by 10 am that day.
Ray was accompanied by a labor leader believed to be JOSE COMEZ RODRIGUEZ
ane a 22 year old man who was to serve as Ray's commmications clerk and
guide.

SECRET


--- Page 48 ---
SECRET Betsy Palmer

Miscellaneous dccuments not in files
Page 2 141410752

5+ Field Information Report on Cuba
Subject: Lecture of Manuel Ray Rivero to Member of JURE's
Delegation from Tampa, Orlando, and Miami, Florida
Date: 26 May 1965
Source: A young Cuban exile trained in information collection.

Ray game opening lecture to 25-30 JURE delegates gathered in Miami on

22 May 1965. Ray claims JURE has men and equipment to win war of liberation
in Cuba and reiterates that only an internal revolution will overthrow
Castro. Said some arms had been left on a military base in the Dominican
Republic and that, regardless of who takes over in the DR, the arms will

be returned to JURE. Made an appeal for money so that organization would
purchase the M/V VENUS, a 110-foot vessel registered in Panama. (Previous
reporting on JURE's base and equipment in DR contained in the following:
TDCSDB-315/00539-65, 16 Feb 65; TDCSDB-315/00301-65, 38 Jan 65;
TDCSDB-315/00383-65, 27 Jan 65; and TDCSDB=315/00269-65, 28 Jan 65.

6. Field Information Report on Cuba
Subject: Plan of Manuel Ray Rivero to Infiltrate the Ranks of the
Central Intelligence Agency
Date: 30 April 1963
Source: Former Rebel Army member (F) active in clandestine movements
Appraisal of Content: 3

On 30 April 1963, Rogelio Cisneros, JURE Exec. Bd. member, said a meeting
held in his home and Antonio Arias, propaganda chief in Miami, in attendance.
Cosneros said it was mentioned that Ray had issued orders to infiltrate

a trusted man into the CIA in order to learn details of any plans with
regard to Cuba and if possible to infiltrate this man into Cuba. Cisneros
said it might be possible to use contacts of George Volsky (sp?) who had

CIA contacts. In regard to future Propaganda, JURE plans to introduce
thousands of anti-american phamphlets into Cuba, including Ray's manifesto

T+ Report on Cuba/Dominican Republic
Subject: Urgent plan of Manuel Ray Rivero to Enter Cuba
Involvement of Ray with Eloy Gutierrez Menoyo and Haiti
Date: 18 September 1964
Source: Jose Garcia Valdez - part of group of Cubam emigres trained
in techniques of information collection.’

Aniirew St. George said Ray is attempting to drop himself into Cuba, regardless
of risk, to regain his political prestige. Ray feels he cannot now compete
with Eloy Gutierrez Menoyo, military leader of SNFE, and other revolutionary
organizations, unless he enters Cuba. He wants to have same influence of
others when Haiti leadership starts distributing bases to Cuban exiles and
providing them help for their aid in overthowing Francois Duvalier (a trade off
According to St. George, the Haiti combine is composed of Gutierrez,

Antonio Cuesta del Valle of Commandos L, and DRE members. Also, Rolando
Masferrer Rojas on the inside of Haiti operations and has the most influence
among the Haitians.

).


--- Page 49 ---
|
{
$

—— SEGRET Betsy Palmer

Miscellaneous documents no in files

Page 3 11410663

8. Information Report - Cuba/Dominican Republic
Subject: Purchase of a Boston Whaler for Manuel Ray Rivero,
Leader of the Junta Revolucionaria Cubana (JURE)
Date: 18 September 196}
Source: Naturalized American citizen - formerly in shipping business
in Cuba, well-trained and experienced debriefer

On 14 Sept 1964, a Miami yacht builder firm purchased a 13-foot six inch
Boston whaler for Ray. Purchaser, Angel Aixala Pertierra said he planned
to go to. Santo Domingo to get permission to Operate the whaler in Dominican
waters, and once this had been granted, would deliver the boat to Ray.

It was on Aixala's Catamaran ct 1208 D, that Ray made his ill-fated initial
attempt to enter Cuba. Aixala is not a member of JURE.

9. Classified Message to Director, from Paris
Date: 8 June 1963

Ray and Emio Guede arrived in Paris and Ray contacted by Nauman on 7 June.
Reviewed plan for ifranqui recruitment in place. Urged Ray to take

immediate action before his presence in -Paris was leaked. ,Guede tries CS
to contact ‘Frariqui’ by phone and on all occasions, phone answered by "east

‘Sorel: or her’ roomate, Helene Pulish (phonetic):\ Guede leaves message wach

time and on last call told tfratiqui," going to Brussels and may have already

left. On 7 June Guede Ses | Frangui at the.opening of his exhibition and
talks to him:’} franqui)listenéd to him, but made no responses to his
veiled overatures. Guede surmizés|frangui’aot interested -- thinks he is
incapable of defending regime but not willing or capable of breaking with
it.  Grovery and JERVAY met Ray. Feel this important re possible future
use Ray Europe. Pari support excellent. fo/s comment: HQS has reason
believe no obstacle convincing Ray push for lrranqui’ return for period to be
eyes and ears anti-Castro conspiracy. ) Ts

-~ 10. Cable Report to Director, from Paris

Date: 14 June 1963

Ray and party travel to Biyssels on 11 June, and Ray continues his efforts
to recruit an agent in place for CIA. Contacts Guillamo Cabrera and
surmised Cabrera held back from a break due to his concern for a brother
inside who is 111. Ray asks Cabrera to arrange a meeting with Gustave Arcos
but Cabrera unable to do so since arcos{/éd¥¢7 leaving for a few days. Ray
extends his trip. Contacts Nauman who tells Ray it is not possible to
resolve all the personal problems of those he has contacted and Ray mist
show them the wisdom and practicality of working in place as a means of
eliminating the regime. Ray willing to settle for defection as he believes
this had an impact on the regime. Report states that Ray extremely active,
moves fast and purposefully, and has given impression of frank cooperation.
Has volunteered to assign a man to be station contact, but feels UNFUMBLE 2°
is too young but should be aware of whomever is designated. Ob



--- Page 50 ---
SECRET ——_setsy rainer

Miscellaneous documents not in files
P age Litters.

#il. Information Cable to Director from JMWAVE
‘ Date: 5 November 1963
Subject: Unification Activities by Manuel Ray Rivero, 23 Oct 1963
Source: A trained observer with access to wide variety of Cuban exiles.
Source is know to most of his contacts as a channel to U.S.
intelligence. Obtained information from Reinaldo Pico Ramon,
officer in the Alianza de Trabajadores Cubanos (ATC, Alliance
of Cuban Workers). .

Pico was told by an unidentified informant, who is probably on the JURE
National Executive, that Luis Manuel Rodriguez, a former rebel army
lieutenant from Santioago de Cuba, and who was known as "Mama, Dolores"
while a member of Brigade 2506, is serving as a Ray agent at Fort Benning,
Georgia. Individuals who are working with Rodriguez are SILAS CUERVO
CASTILLO and LUIS CLEMENTE BARCENA SERRANO, both former members of
Brigade 2506.


--- Page 51 ---


--- Page 52 ---
ann annette A Ai te Nh et stare emanntincanik Na

n
41410565 SECRET PL 6, 19 7F
letey, Fata
. ‘ . 2, * Z -
Pep Bote ~ — Yor 8/2 ete, : a
Gprowrd om 10 hew!F60 jew Ondat ut. ao a Youle

Rar a -Lbl 13 dip 1960
GME 0 Be teed” Fp Cornel % ewceca lis

eerfendlich ow a1 Yaw 950% ts Sedat Lis

 toge Ueix.- feo + too Vows oe eee BOX .
Aw Aare Mane leche mo angry 200
NSE Obicke- heres Lost relcuad Baw
rfermmante atunevedl - Vary aducec Ltriab,
tucbenctsd fo wines Word (fr
doug Prads Gran’ yy Pilaret 957, ws 4
pew DOP hf 9 banveterw wasougia Le
f2 abe uth np aetlerely — gv Asegned!
she Leto. Grarchaced & AMecwepafir us
Ft it whack. Ae Aad ow A youre’

Oe fo ct Austins + desma

susuabd with, kez fee GG
Wp. palit, Sagi Drs

é Cude vy.
an A aig Codd on forticr) .



--- Page 53 ---
SECRET z

11410567

feu co 4h , ft as y frown)! J fous
denid aitizy Ber"s ae
Diba wth K noph -eudliale

DY Che becee of poli ddmenetala .

: . wa .

Sey Bamiter Aawsater, bu,

| hen Gf acuetace, evens pb) dower
| Tlie § Aeemnate 5 sdegpe + ofl G pratiius ;
a? al o4 Pee .


--- Page 54 ---
ne angie . .

e S72
t Yoe/o¢
SECRE ae

Mop hog te

e-tee «
for Polo ae + 208

1 - blu —p vets necoeraes |
fore Jatces

ve Cass? ~ Vober» — Mo rate
; i a

C/A @a.—
Mmnetid othe tea Peony he


--- Page 55 ---
| SECRET.

11110553
Ray, anal am US ay Wane. om 07g 196/

5 OY
rae

LZ 2) YES
QO rence Piece 4 Ga L967. .

kon 1960 by obte fe pen

ON Rass frase wae of C select vi /Fé0, Faull
Oh ow ¢ Fb.) & bacriantley -conclor
tomate eo anati oF ,

Rey (Brut Yapelior Redrgiion
Ey Forgelg])

a /6 fom 60 '  PoB is Clug. 1E9/, Wavreva Cd
| t C+ $237
Fa24933

a cons Capit VMARC ,
SECRET


--- Page 56 ---
oben deck Gone 11210555

QD. ae FRI Aeped— Lalit Bye rane
be haus on ho
eal, Gizbroes .

om thasg CL / Jenalinal Gfprsea! valet lina.
Lb weld bo aves Oe a

Sunectg leit bt 74. SPER four

tite dee SUMO firaeet!

“doy yh “907 — 38 408 /
i) 10 few. ks

BaF y70-5 26.

Gaeral, OF Fram, Mor. SORT


--- Page 57 ---
oe Soma
SECRET, WS 2°
1114055

Biber Jenage. Tats, nomi

Lhe fnclitrvaig Bune + Trent. Kevebirconario

ies 1767
a,’ FRL) — buat Ly Ugeneg Aw Mey | 760 ;
Blin | Noumea) Lanter hg % ke GA
Cache por teemlenine pow Ort Er
Metra tor, , Sarge Great Prt, ateues

sade. laito gouges, Baral as gollaih albion
Pty abe idly tend» Mebbed peer

: Carel ow een Moral aeceliics
ASO6 wae eal a
f Crea fen. 1760, Ah CLO formed Poe
loordinate. "> hast? FD ae woctb,

LG SOT an herve

= eas a al > Ae

SECRET


--- Page 58 ---
SECRET oe oO
- (301 215923) ca
@O soe a api by CID ~pew

| haee tee Bet, Gb "ner de

: 14410555
OQ. pine Calle,
| Te Barcetew
Rep a WM CoBRA 125-5
|  Dusiter 39 9 oy
@ 4WERGO fe.. eek, Pneralee, Ge
freee De wile ag anal Look fect,
@ LWE R60. tho haw hblnuns, owed ge
forela. pk up
SPL, Homage

phanmarg holed p Sept 96S, [2 3 -

CHOS - Firat aS. Brmg a Pra
: 7rd) ———_

- SECRET


--- Page 59 ---
We
SECRET @

es 27 Mg (765 |
Treme % Fle frome Faurmuer. GF. Fond
kibpiet >» Gedo CnilL Yreralee (nevernte)
~ 3505s%
Bee sa6fes- Treraleo Lb pet enad ¥
AS. Raveing Complclsd Aco ateigrsd. AeTio
for SOD, Aehiged % bs no Lunges f ccttint
BSD, Luce Bo F-sI1Z B® He. cated
prt DB peplce one whel ofpise

qlasles- ,
11410553

@ 10 bee. ey
Tremo B pre frum 2). Mn: Kot?

Wisralea+ (AR e-11¢2) — 708 58CE) aud
Carts Cag Masters (AA 2-143) - # 2237/2400)
ling US om Pan flight ale Kemereclg
OitinataneL ow I hiee. IGG YS. Broaden, Tus
Adored 5 roguented ld Cour Le Hy. fice Keapp
Ae ~94' from Phong a UG. otiy .
(F cntliad x02 following |
| Sfarotad. Ltion asad) Cs) Does 11 19 6¢f
cmt apa ait |
Aegan tia (as /64, Pproralee tried babu
D pacot Corey — nel R Greg? Cruel cf
Cuduwe APB oe 5 ben net re Hed Fr plane
: SECRET


--- Page 60 ---
of 78
SECRET Bie ep

7 Dermond E

. a7 Db. 1704 meme OD Chay Cr/on Demi et.
@.Trerales qua bi bticte, tat

Aewvn bo Ded sonnchg a a

nade, derogatri, Memarke aha C1

111140557

SECRET


--- Page 61 ---
i SECRET

Oo har oa Cansroe Bing

6 FRE tpn Gard.
Mee rs bee. 72 Subp’ Relic Weneretna
Corneror

lye
53/77
6 [22/79

® one plow LE 2 Inreug. 76 /

Grom | Baig, , Chin, Chara Mee 1 Hy 3 ply
Facies 4a rgd G Le) polarucel
C/A lin rear Ase .

‘ Caenirga DPOB", 420/27 Camaguary , a ew,

GO: Reged 4 Duaitieti att. is Jel-1973

@ee oS 652 Crore | Aogdlin Wenesaler

Ry SA Lila D, Gabe

Ke tdi 4 ® US. ow 12fez/be as Bu potrranent™
New

14740442

_ SECRET



--- Page 62 ---
ver

| aw ws fecwer. |
: Hajek Subs LB FE
| Og va ew 1968 Ale ue 2 abode

Oper Comitilles MDD. abdraceedl ® ngev
‘Groat Rade K ety Pod Fangarin
"dounin ynb@ © ou smctage
daninior pth (te. Ail - Goto
au has Diredem) Pgh bees “ee
. Pega Aeedorr) igh rs (Nek? Agere
Aperove dh ¢ Count OG up artag
par ma 8 Apo gua, an opts

CIA lounestaw : LOE grintl (Gsmasomnal

brake Upfront om 30 Show. 195-9 aud _

ee Ad prowek OW) SO vAy lF60 gow
Cubes |

[te dee as Ma Vepenrar,

yest alah, apace 96s . Lorebete

Fete anid “mm te ge eerie Cate,

6 Vem > ple: undated) “Wdbaalin, CA tod
approval qe Mat wb Crate.
fae A Cees :


--- Page 63 ---
11440445

Truagus ( Batiste) astee Yaen -
DPOB - 1g Sgt 1929, dao Dba ely Aihe

"SECRET


--- Page 64 ---
Sw :

ilralag

SEGRET 14140445

Crh. 77 Repel Comet or Book
aaa tow, Sted. 63 - Chern afcles a fel, Lo CIR,

Cbe Prt 65.

- pas. TOLASH saat death gis + Ka C oth, opens ume

THBB : CtA Fe bemanee an tle deg .

Now. 27 Flcakt > Air reriad cod ooieed Tampa .

THBC_: ex Opurat tons Ageenal Cobe,

Some, srivksy hed spp bof CLA, aoetlas Ahr slemucts 4
YS. too t 0?)
Cpe —
2 bathe eviles 0S, D forman prbtic. ffreaed ay Jenene —
rmashing wlukik Hermce Mure He, To Oth pee?
Comin mre dT arneel Pree,
Didewttm ed ; conmilardl nol secure.
B) |
Shengis — hevmmaack vormld Le have Kgeere >
SHT LAK Rapti areca -
Cutvovene- PBL apets stun pil wre he
wade Nev. 1460. (legct io FBD meme to
CTA)
CHA -no pls Ra cer wT obr, 61, (hit baal t
hase dis ceseel >),
Roan: im tods PE hranaly race ¢rA
supped Toon taabamgncnps. Rs origin lean To
eed Re con] mies.

i Cr prey
: Vas tad


--- Page 65 ---
othe Plots L144Nag>
: Aabue Verane. ane CTA; Roo he 66 afk tid .
CEA aefsnal his offer Tinto -

Ried meres om Cl. dt pe Kn Choo.
Frmnsarinas, 3- Seme plam,
)F mares lam ApAa %1 Bm Crpeaed ra,
tol oppeenente a Spe‘Iy Pefoe, selvlege he Faic polest

+) Tuner ‘bi

a | 2” 7 Me bb
| /\ TAB D AMLAS ft
t | CIA: 19 apo Drore relatraehin wpemurrredin oli ,

True BUS Ce. Dalim Loraliel flcemnlls

SMU Zéirage: Hatirals Fel +oWc. RES .

THB Fy AUDELETED mexico cing COVERAGE of Unto.
\/ VR6b’. wausPAPeR stories — pre calf tape

—
—

6) D6. Ropar
Pater te Aucgast wo. 1 fae “ci
CO ypdana le: |
Phage Aut 6O- Lt tall
hot hon sees foul,
Bi VaiR~ 4 Scant Comm) enchact, Hoke
0 Cnmhh- Lege After
SLs o 140-w.g. Rede LE: - Made. -O' Comme,
Rea hee mim ry bAtd"(Cturane)

ytd
yl PAE
Wevudy 7


--- Page 66 ---
‘QEpne
SUT 14440445

Mamie mach ~ Sétry, (440, R-G-
[lescne; pon antl — 1960.
Wltlwn tn ‘bo.
Nak “Poke; ore
Mess: dC BR. (beta Ly os / Cle ne
sate)

4 pest Gx.

Su. Jobe 1 om phase
‘Scottie Aba pei ZRRIFLE,
QTWIN~ ~prmceple ate oneal ussel fa
Nov, ie ace hf)

ZRATPLE - Smolin, ws Vet te

Crverge.
QT ~leamercbl Ly L dt. -
Preach 21, IGE,
ie . O ‘Connell phos out

Retell: mech, Rete pun
pie = Aa€, MY pechaps Meher thon .
Hetind.c rcctunek thats Meare ~
Fils cebeered |
rhe i4er. Hee Gm Mean . hrells
Renae lee oT vn Tereehid
Bestel oan bateabacdad..
SeUHET Tro 0 longer imvebrch wre cxcsats suc Carel
Rell sedd " “Mawes (beresia.- Comes j batons )


--- Page 67 ---
41110449

igen promrer Crna foe Rea lle or
Lat, mete Meee

Hag 62 - Leg 6d PLL i low = wth FR

eS

— Leh C2 fom 63, .

: Feb 63 opera in aed.

urns. 6B. Nerney RereBhe dbmriecir bc,
Sua Papeek calls fh aniline —~
de-eo Le Brees guanil seo ft, (0) § .

; — Warlappess brecdact
: a alts Makers te bee Bavnes,

e)



--- Page 68 ---
| Jil ded ef Loge
| Z MACY:
ly ante ote: a

t vad wot ¢ 7

Teg wg
om ia ie Te

Le
| | 28 app de ICP 5 tone
: Ge x ae i ie
| aes MLL, lMartiphy .
wr bood wt emi igi

CF -
s lilfers ia wy Be
, 2A GZ
res the ny BEE 7 tepene py

7 Ett beni 2 ee Og

wil along _ (eeeeper,

Dr. Fo ae -

: oe Oe Oe C4 saasale
Yr | fen Vt ea five


--- Page 69 ---
L. BO wavisber, Lett.
| Leth! jl onid 9

44441045 ¥
Uoludlr- iy lon

E mee CO"€"’ ATH EE

~ Mint (xr bhi
| Eiplesedt bli) Z GLE for (To
ERE |
| Ch 0 m flict, :

wl npr Wie 2 | {POL

Letedlin ! Wy, FRM gpPC ee,

foen Miu SAME egw

yl Me’ fais

| < MLIERO HLS.

ow to tua B petlr hipaa paybay gacge.
A geeneidf 1h Cel, FR
Via! baal dt batay

downy sore ul BI?

“VN yuna 17;
regu tz ita ZOE am

: ; Pp Ula Hyp VM
, Ao on


--- Page 70 ---
SECKET
| Was a Aid yeiper
Se Lot per om

Y eri YS (CLT
ps Oe
11410452

tH .
ye fee ped sabi ibe
| ec We Ny’,

Nb i TUL Ma Ve
fifa Een, pyle
Nasu trun pu Ville — ppb

febid> CAAUE (flr

Ua Me Mittin
Y Tales tty da wife, Life lite

xz mpfy Niufe Vewerie Mares,
: Eitegrd nttln Yo Lie
Daven a’, [lied teil,
[ets PRTD Ravn -
““ - FMA a:
“ct, Vesa mn “se
\ nhl ee Tile 5 a
GY Hep never” SESS


--- Page 71 ---
(Mawud, YF prageaass Clie err

f
Dbnul ampfy [PAht fitted’
“ay Miishttlte, uf flit apiece
Clevin Viet dipererl Aidit cor Zr,

| 12, REE 11118454

BE Mitel. - - tedcdt
WOE’: WE Kaeg (11 / Mite JOE 2

ok OF feu thd fe CO feeper® |
_ 2 pre Freanrer A De JO CLA

tp td
| > tn (luiliy few a /Fé2. Comes,
fod, vith in peed Cl tte

at gt a LEMS Y tt baal

penidez;

MG poste edith olin
. Mn booed Voewerid

vm OE Degen 7 Oo tty, ews
0 ld LOTR ULDEE


--- Page 72 ---
We ~ SebueT

1085 Ti Tiki il

Loi SEE Wal Geol J ple Stale
. aoa eae
—

aa

od, Yidd a i penne og

Mattie, SAME, 2 EL

Sei
Stet
weve |


--- Page 73 ---
14118455

nag y Arltn. Bac! PAZ
: [Coop Lhedeeficere,
Vy a ae

j, amen Wr ts tener Vern crupeeg
CAdtld | torn 2 4/936 tr 5 E 3g

, et Mapteve, (bruy tye

Og dating WVireete (sbot~

: 4 De Le Vrrntle (bok

. 0 Cee fac |

S Det /4y4-) /iptind J (Mitige be Vs

ot han Aykeued CoS bay's Ud Tha

ss Mantle A rfezite

wk i beluwy

M3 Chan vn buale senor,
gow A172. birt OP LEVOT HIen.

"H
HL Feed Wh, AY Mitty foc Place


--- Page 74 ---
i. TY Muh srrv 11410453
| phil Cth pita Y tay cb to

\ (id lh onl 9 Mlle oF Meee

nat or be VME ZEA
: OMe

Meet yg Allin
le Gr ji Apel oa
di foe will eb te

opr entra /
Wield AMG tefeced d Kcr? Car

_ Hat it squat (Mii 40 “Crrnege

Longer shat Ze

aw i
mand a  tilide crbbirn a1 dB,
Od te Yon blz BPG 2
i Zz fold

niente b 4 mitriy de


--- Page 75 ---
11410457

Cota /77/ +

AG
y
T



--- Page 76 ---
afro ie pees

E ZL c Lienefes oy Coto
“Blaude Mer b WE lity GGL

; of win of (Vii
11410453 Livni 7H | ew, Bert
ee t63 UA Leecainae

be, 1 Dr Arbuce Mhz Aah tovg ¢ (Ce

oli apevie Gar a Me,
7 ja EE Clom

Ww peti 7 Lo wand he. oP bape OE
ia

. if

Sears

e
. casi Pa


--- Page 77 ---
- ||
[ / : ernnny
| 7 Oe a M heya re hank, Dog.
Eee

———-

an Ma F — re, So

| We 7 Cer _ Leosetud Ze

| 0 e i Dea Vi FAL, ae oe
7 Mlle - 27 2e SGPE A gx

g del. nit Li)

WC #H 11140459
: pw TELL cA
| shyt oY VE Ze a GE, Gl tien, ZED
i /OFGF pgpore

| Mevien, fitt (efbeg A775
Mab! hf 30 HE) vor L27 pity VALE Ze (PES
eH Me focez Zan LL,

pit CU WL Gd fipascalt pyilag”
brief geeccee be L100 ( OE oe
7%, Ve ee ee
MELE LEZ Ui ese feta, “UfLA?

Ch geewé: ‘

; G5 fi (nye Ut ddd 5 cat MULE.
ri lula) A, thee AP ~~
7 Grav » Soars frtEME Leak) 7G =

SECRET


--- Page 78 ---
! - Ahtus tant Eee) pin then jog gad aes
! WS, Daly we fll Uh”
eo al fi (peat

11410469

SECRET

