
--- Page 1 ---
198-10007-10021

2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |

JFK Assassination System Date: 6/24/201

Identification Form

AGENCY :
RECORD NUMBER :

RECORD SERIES :

AGENCY FILE NUMBER :

Agency Information

ARMY
198-10007-10021

CALIFANO PAPERS

ORIGINATOR :
FROM:
TO:

TITLE :

DATE:
PAGES:

SUBJECTS :

DOCUMENT TYPE:
CLASSIFICATION :
RESTRICTIONS :
CURRENT STATUS :
DATE OF LAST REVIEW :

OPENING CRITERIA :

COMMENTS :

Document Information

ICCCA
CHMN, SUBCMMT ON CUBAN SUBVERSION
MEMBER OF THE SUBCOMMITTEE

REPORT FOR JULY-AUGUST ON ACTIONS TAKEN TO COMBAT CASTRO-COMMUNIST
SUBVERSION

09/30/1963
23

ENHANCEMENT OF INTELLIGENCE ON CUBAN
SUBVERSION

STRENGTHENING OF COUNTER-INSURGENCY
CAPABILITIES

CONTROL OF TRAVEL TO AND FROM CUBA

CONTROL OF TRANSFER OF FUNDS

SURVEILLANCE OF CUBAN DIPLOMATIC, COMMERCIAL
AND CULTURAL MISSIONS

CONTROL OF CLANDESTINE MOVEMENT OF GUERILLAS
AND ARMS :

CONTROL OF MOVEMENT OF CUBAN PROPAGANDA

PAPER, TEXTUAL DOCUMENT
Secret

1B; 4

Redact

04/08/1998

Califano Papers, Box 2, Folder 26. Memo from Chairman, Subcommittee on Cuban Subversion to the _
members of the Committee re: Report for July-August on Actions Taken to Combat Castro-Communist
Subversion,

TERK Lore

partment of the Army EO 19528
ideatssity Exclude — Exempt

Authority,

© Refer To ~
Review Date 2015 By, ome

vol

HW 50955 Docld:32424014 Page 1


--- Page 2 ---
SECRET
, September 36, 1963
TO: Members of Subcommittee on Castre-Communist .
Subversion.
PROM: Chairman, Subcommittee on Cuban Subversion

SUBJECT: Report for July - Auguet on Actions Taken to
Combat Castro-Commumnist Subversion,

Attached ig a dyaft of the Subcommittee's report for
July and Auguet on actions teken to counteract Gastro-
commmist subversion in the hemisphere. ‘The draft has been
prepared on the basie of the material which you furnished
with certain modification, The CIA members will note that I
have extracted from his submission the iteus of action taken
and pleced these in the body of the report. The intelligence
information couteined in the submission I. have made inte an
annex, I think it is vary useful to have the intelligence
data form part ef the report, and request that in the future
the CIA member prepare his subaisiien in two parts.

May I have your comments on the draft by close of
business Getober 1, 1963,

Coples to: CIA - Mr, Wheeler (2)
DOD - Col. Haig (2)-—4FG, > ¢
USIA ~ Mr. Wagley (1)
RAR ~ Mr. Hart (1)
Justice - Mr. Geogheghan (1) Zz EF b 2 ~_

Lafte Catldh
\ te Sllilad adtrsd tle. dif 2f
| ARA:WCBowdler:jg VB her 4 ~ eg

ere downgrading ya vonatta
Ceclassizication —

|
|

HW 50955 Docld:32424014 Page 2



--- Page 3 ---
BRAFT SECuer LZ, ef ff copies
GRoup P_"
fixeludea f¢,
1 aomngrads ame q tonettar

declassificatiog »

od

a. Developed highly eseful information en frequency
of Cuban “chartered” flights to Brezil, names and nationalities
of paseengere and crew, and lag meseures of eanteol follawed
by Brazilian authorittes. Transmitted this information to
tation chiefs in the Letin dmerican countries of the agen
Brazilians travelling on these flights.

'b. Maintained clese wateh over travel to and from
Guba. See Annex B fox table of bnewa travel ef Latin Americans
during Joly and Agger.

¢. AS @ gesult of information furnished by hin by the
CIA Stekion in Buencs Aires and with the Station's urging, che
Argentine Minister af Interior indicated that he would make
every effort to prevent Argentine delegates from atterding the
international Uniew of Acchiteets Congress in Havana.

ad. At the weging ef the CIA Station and the Eubssey
the Bolivien Minister ef Interior leeved in aldsJaly an order
prohibiting the granting of travel permite to Cube on other

bloc comertes to Belivien nationale.

HW 50955 Docld:32424014 Page 3


--- Page 4 ---
@, Partly as a result of the afferts of the CIA
station im Santiago, the Cevernmeent of Chile prohibited the
entry into Chile ef organizers of the Coben sponsered Second
latin American Youth Gongress, which had been acheduled to take
place in Sentiage in August. Thie wee one ef the feetere which
led to postponement ef theConpr

£, Alter considerable prodding by the CIA Station
sad the Gebsasy the Minister of Public Security ef Costa ica
tam presented legislative proposais to the Costa Rican Assenbly
which will require a14 gersons intending to travel te Communist
‘@ounteles te have theis travel appreved by a newly created

Gests Riese seeurley agency.

g. CIA Station in Hexice City developed information
concerning the clandestine arrival of pascengers iu Vera Cruz
en Cabana merehant ships. Ueforts are belng made to obtain more

4nformation and te eneeurage stricter controls by the Moxtean
authorities.

@, Tnetrueted Exbessy Coaskry to ory to persuade
Guinean authorities to deny use of airport facilities by flights
on Habena-Veseed route. These efforts achieved a texporary
withholding of permiseion for future regular flights, at least

HW 50955 DoclId:32424014 Page 4



--- Page 5 ---
mth such tine as the Soviets develop their om refueling facilities
at Conakry,
b. Enettwueted Eobessy Rio te epproec

| authorities to express our deep concern at the growing frequency
of Cubin noteschedulad flighte to Brasil and request thete
cooperation in curbing then, Also instructed our Hubasstes

in several Latin Acerfican countries to work with CIA atatdon

eblefs ia fur the names of nationsle of those conntrics

travelling on these flighte to lecel euthorities aad urging
them: (1) to inseLeute tighter controle on theiz own cltizens
saved ling to Guba, and (2) to express theiy concera to the
p) GoveRnm ENT
sf Brantl’Sver Coban use of Brazil ae a way station

for transporting gubversives,

6. As a result of representations made to the British
peversnent ehaut Guben flights to che Cayean Lalande waneyiog
latin American subversives, the British develo;

achene whieh will effectively prohibit the uae of Britieh
Gevithemn dependencies by Subans a9 transit points for passengers.
The Bedeish intend co require transte visas of passengers passing
through thelx dress, and to reject applications for auch visas

eucepe in certain @peelal cases, Ferséne not posecesing visas
would ba prevented from lesving theis airereft, o¢ would be

ws
|

HW 50955 Docld:32424014 Page 5


--- Page 6 ---
aden

geturned te theiz poiat of origin,

d. Insteueted Bubecey Kexizo City on Auguet 25 to
iaferm the Mextoan aizline MA that the United States is
opposed te @ proposal that GIA operate charter flights to carry
tefugees from Havana to Contrel America. WA, as a reeult,
stated thet they had no intention of proceeding further with
“thie project.
e, Inetructed 0.8. Misefone im Cur

aepo and the Ha gue
to investigate a report that ELM wae planniag to renew sh
ocheduled Curacac-Habane flights and to reiterate US opposition
to resumption of air service vo Cuba. KIM assured eur Eubagsy
that thera is no plan to initiate sewles, schedwled or none
acheduled, te Hsbana,

£, Inetwucted Eabagsy Ottawa to express our étrong
objections to @ proposal that « Cubane charter @light pick up
& geeond group of U.S, students te Mentres te fly them to Cuba.
The fidghe was net authorized,

& Instructed Consulate Georgetown te investigate
Cubana approaches to secure flight facilities. Miesioa reported
on August 1 that the Governor had no knowledge of any talks
between the B.G. Ministry of Conmunications and the Cuban Covern-
ment regarding landing rights for Cubana planes, The Covernor

HW 50955 DoclId:32424014 Page 6



--- Page 7 ---
neon reported that either the Guben nor the Beitdsh
6 had vised the issue of Landing <ights with

h. Urged the governments of Nexles, Canada, Jenatea
aad the Wetherlands to refuse to aasiee the Guban government
in 1€s efforts to fiad a short route for recurnyfthe 58 Anerican |
stedents who illegally travelled to Cuba. Also informed |
American Airways that we were opposed te a Guban eequest for
@ PAA charter flight to fly the studente from Habana to Sew York,
a. Instructed our afesions et Port of Spain and |
‘Barbades on sdveral eceasione to approach these governments co
express the concern of the U.S. at indications of Cuban interest
_ im ths use of thelr aviation facilities.
Subasvy Fort of Spain discussed with the Foreign Secretary
of Trinidad various legal moves evailable that would enable
GOTT te conttel movements of aixeraft within their terrltory,
iting emamples o€ euch controle tastieuced by Hexlee, Caneda.
end irelend, He indicated teceptivences to the prepesal thes
the iiet ef suggestions be made available te the aviacion effictals

J. During a previews reporting period Embassy Santiago

HW 50955 Docld:32424014 Page 7



--- Page 8 ---
waged the government of Chile to refuse vieas to Cubsn delegacds
ing fox the TE latin dmertean
Youth Congress scheduled for August in the Chilean capital.
inabliicy of Cuban delegates to obtain Chi ian visas for this
ng is one of the contributing factors te the Cuban sponsors
ng during August that the meeting had been pastponed.

& Sent general ineeructioss to eur atesions in somaneies

which garticipate iy the International Unten of Architects asking
then to urge the seepexetion ef govermental aucherities ia
preventiog er discouraging the attendance of thedy citizens to
the VIE UIA Congress iu Eabena, Septesber 29-Octeber 4, 1963.
Fellewed thie up with fastructieus te individual peste to try
where fenelble to dinsuade aruhitects fren fees world eeuntrles
frow serving on the jury for the selection of ea Bay of Pigs
menument.

gee te block @ glen to
commence food pares shipments to Gite, on « feomerctal busts,

| that warld heave vequired the eseablicheent ef scheduled weekly

eherter flights by Canadian planes.

f

HW 50955 Docld:32424014 Page 6



--- Page 9 ---
Reaponding to the urging ef the CLA Station police
of the State of Guansbera seized large quantities of prepa-
ganda brought inte Brazil ty paesengere en the spectel Cubena_
flights. For exemple, some 59 pounde of orinted propaganda
wee taken fvom the various passengers whe ererived on the 16
Aoguet Cubana flight. .

3. SGontwol af ©)

i surveillance of the ares surveunding Cuba
during the sonth of July at the seme cage and with the seme
eupheeis as price to L July 1963.

b. Continued to maintein 0.5. Foress, primarily from
within the Atlantic Command, available te assist other Caribbean
governments im the interception of suspicious craft in

territorial waters, ae wight be requested. Ne eueb requests were
veeeived from any other government during the period covered by
this repert. However, U.S. Forees did keep track of the
lecation of the Soviet merchant freighter MITCHURINGE, which

HW 50955 DoclId:32424014 Page 9



--- Page 10 ---
wes suspected of carryiag subversives and eras fram Guba to
British Gaiae in uld-July. MITCHURINSX was under U.S.
surveilicace feom ite departure from Havana atti Gebted
Kingdom forces assumed the task of keeping thie ship under
survelllance upon its approach to Georgetewn, Britieh Gutana.
Subsequently, Britich police search of MITC)

MUSTINGR in Reteish
Galsne waters revesled nothing of a suspicious nature.

at the repeated urging of the CLA Searion in Lésa
the Pexuvien Covernment late in Auguet sublighed a new antix
terrorists law providing a penalty of oo lese than five years
iuprisouert. for persens who perticiare in euercilla activities
oc in the illegal mamufecture of weapone or ezpLosivat.

The Peruvian National Intelligence Service is working
on @ load furniched by the CIA Station in Lime concerning a
200 tom vessel reportedly involved in ares traffic.

Tnetsucted our Consulate General in Geurgetewa ta
investigete reports that coumercial cargoes (which could conceal
ilifeit axms traffic wut of Cube) hed developed betwean British —
Golene end Cube. Investigetions to date have been. negative.

HW 50955 Docld:32424014 Page 10



--- Page 11 ---
Bs

Coepexsted with the foraign dgeets Coutvol Office of
the Treasury Uepartment in developing blocking controle with
respect to Cuba which went iato effect on July 9, 1963.

ae. Continusd the inetellation of miliraxy commentca-
tions facilities in Latin America. Gperational dates for the
multi-channel radie stations to bs installed fa Menagua, |
ipa, Hondures have been delayed to 15

Setebar 1963 and 15 Desewher 1963, respectively because of new

| Weeragua aud Tegued.

engineering and. contractual, nequigements. Wegetiations are

continuing with Colombia and Beusdor for inetallacion of U8.

military radio facilities. Conplotion of a atw eenmercial teaise

isthmian cable in the Panema Conal Zone within che edning month.

is expected to duprove military commanications within the

United States ond the Coumender-in-thief, U.S. Southern Command.
b. Continued the surveillance of Cuba by U.S. Perecas,

feporting as befare to 0.8. guemanders , oxganizations and ageneten.

HW 50955 Docld:32424014 Page 1i


--- Page 12 ---
ohie
Reports of survelilance have been disseminated to ell who have

& tequizeneat te mew,

e- Esteblished a 24 hour pex day, 7 deys por week duty
wateh et the U.S. Military Groups im the Caribbean couseries ia
conjunction with inplementetion of the milttery alerting syatem.
Continued efforts te etaff the U.S. Southern Conmand Intelligence
Center with properly cleared, trained personnel (thie ceater is
the military focal point for relaying information concertaing
the movement of subversives). Filled, partially, the eutherized
biliets tm the U.0. Seuthera Command intelligente Center and
ook wider consideration the problem of an inéreage dn the biliet
Structure in the Center. fhe Commaadex~in-Chie®, U.S. Southern
Conmend together with hie intelligence efficer wisited Honduras
and Nicaragua end determined thet no significant problems existed
whieh would interfere with effective operations in those

@. Action previsusly initiated by the Coumander, U.S.
Nevai Forces, Southern Command (COMUSNAVSO) to establish a Suali
Crate Inspection aud ‘Training Team (SCIATT) aa 2 contribution te
the Caribbean Surveillance System te progressing satleleatort iy.

HW 50955 Docld:32424014 Page 12



--- Page 13 ---
atde
Permanent eesigamant of U.S. Ceast Guard personnel to SCIATT
in the Canal Zena has been approved and the U.S. Cease Guard
has taken appropriete implenenting actions.

@. Dering the period of thie report, the SCIATT con-
dugted an en-the-job training course at Ponterenss, Costa
Rice, Traiaing wae given to 1$ members of the Guardia Civil
of Gosta Riea whe were elther sewly acelened te the 40 foot
Coast Gaard utility beats (CCUBs) ov were to be assigned as
xeplicenent erew members.

a. & quarterly inepeceion and evaluation of the coUzs
provided other Central American countries wan condueted duxing
the perled 17 te 31 August by a wobdie treiming team GfFT)
made up of SCIATT personnel.

g» Centioued efferte to improve the internal security
of Latin Anerican armies through the provision of Intelligence
Advisors<. Presently there sco ouch advisers aselened to 14
| Latin eountries, enphosizing counterintelligeses and counter-
subversion.

bh. DBurding the reperting period Mifs condutted training
in counter ineurgeacy for the armed fovege of Colombia, Bolivia,
Vonesuale, Pere and 81 Salvador.

HW 50955 Docld:32424014 Page 13



--- Page 14 ---
w[2q

%. Civic detion Wifes were gent to Cuetemala, Bolivia,
Seloubie, El Salvador, Jamaica and Reuddor.

GIA Stations throughout Latin dserieca coutimed in a
great majority of countries te furoish to the lesal internal
security orgenizations with whem they are in iieleen taforme-
ties eonceming trevalara to end from Cuba, ae well as such
information as came te CLA'e attention concerning the movenent
ef fuads, azwe and propagenda material. In ieony iuctamcas, the
furnishing of information to the internal security service by
the CIA Station was paralleled ty the furnishing of gimiler

| | information to the forelen office by the Ambateader or bic
veptasentetive. Tha responce te this infewmation has varied
greatly, The Central American countries, ia gensxel, began to
pay attention to the information and teke action om it. At the

Scuving the vapertiag periad
ether extrere, the Bresilien Goverument/showed Little taciduetion

to follow up on the tafermetton.

& Reiterated to the Foreiga Minister of Peru oor
interest in having the faete of the Fuerte Maldonade ineident

HW 50955 Docld:32424014 Page 14



--- Page 15 ---
wiSe
brought te the attention of the GAS, end ureed that thie aetion

be teken ao soon ae poowtble.
bs Uered the Goveranent of Guatemala to subait evidence
of cemunlee eetivicy to the das.

fs Bers wees of 2 ek hae

HW 50955 Docld:32424014 Page 15



--- Page 16 ---
4

Tneteueted Embasey La Paz te follow up clegely on
charges of invelvement of Cuban wlagion & internal polities,
ee ‘Bolivia, and, at the Bubasay's discretion, to point out to
Bolivian offielals the eppertunity for & possible break in
relations with Guba. Eubassy Le Pox was not able te press
for a break when. the evidence of Guben intervention did not
prove te be es conclusive aw originally veparted.,

B.

a Obtained section by the GOAS on July 3 on the Levelie
Committee Report traneminting the decument to the governments
and utging them to iuplement the apecifie ead general xecom=
mendations tentained thereia as Soon as possible.

b. Through Embassy Managua ingomed the Niesraguan
Government of the matters which we wanted te have considered
Goring the informal weeting of the Ministers of Security and
interfer of the Isthmian countries held in Mamagua, Auguet
26-25 in preparation for the second formal meating of the
Managua Security Conference. countries later this year.

HW 50955 Docld:32424014 Page 16



--- Page 17 ---
aioe
c Reaseured President Schick of Nicaragua in the
meat emphatic terms that the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty did not .
mean thet eur ateltede toward Gastre has altered in the
Glightest, end etreseed our incarese tn steing steady progress

by all the Istheien countries in implemeoting the recamenda~
tions of the Manag

aubvereive offerte.

a Security Conference to bleck Ochan

é, Explained in detail the nature of the Cuban threat
and the related poliey objectives of the 0.5., gaging eonversia~
tien in Londen end itn Weshington «heh Me. Adam Watson, newly
sppeiated Beitigh Ambassador to Cube.

@ The Agency's press service during the reporting
period transmitted 12 articles, commentaries, and backgroundera
on its wixeless {ile service te USIA posts throughout Latin.
Ameniog for placement in the leeal newspapers and che Yoiee of
4eoviea Spanieh treadessts to Lectin america cereled a tetal of
28 commentaries end features on the subject of Cuban-based
subversion in adéitien to the regular re
in the bourly newiceste.

s of developments

HW 50955 Docld:32424014 Page i?



--- Page 18 ---
& in mespones to standing Ageury instructions to give
vuents celated te Cuba-baced

Special attention to devel,
subversion, WSIS poses in Latin America were prompt in reporting
incidents and in providing editorial comments from the Letia
fmeciean preée, all of whieh was used im the Ageney's wadle and
press auviput.

Tho main developments txeated in the Agency's radio and
press coverage in¢laded Castro's July 26 apeech urging revoke
tions tm Latin duerioa, the disesvery of terrerier weapons
factories in Guayaquil, the Sevaderden Yiee Praecideat’s eecuakie
of Cuben cespenedbiitey for terrerion, the statement by Grete
Bepartment Press Officer Richard Phillips chet “potential
Subversive agente” €com Cuba te the Caribbesa aree were paseiag
through Gxen Cayman, the expuleion of a Bolivien youth leader
fee receiving fu fends teem, Cal
Heondsras - fen protests against meddling by the Cuban Embassy
tm the winer's strife. A Volee of Aneriea roving seporter in
Letin America provided severat -
subversion pleture in countries he visited.
support of the Aecany"s effert en Gubad-based

ba, Castroe-tedined terveriats in

Ge Fp

HW 50955 DocId:32424014 Page 18



--- Page 19 ---
three pemshiers daring the period based on Castre’s report, of

his viele te the Soviet Unien (showing that he contradicted a a

hieselg ta sor of bie etrevagens elaine of Soviet ptogtess)
uttered by Cubsin ‘Labor under Gastro, and the fate.
of polities. ptisencea aa Gabe. Uheon. coupteted, these penphiess
wlll be reproduced and dletributed 4a quanticy throughout the

the Lesses sutge

QEa2s

HW 50955 Docld:32424014 Page 19



--- Page 20 ---
rotuaea mo? Bo . _
xcluded from automata SECRE 3
downgrading and... —
declassificatio j
a esha

Latin sicane to and jor me Cuba. The ‘Hive sue Sashes eines
lite duly have carried nearly 400 aen-Cubans,

the: sixet ef the teres cerice «= on 25 July «- broughe
Letde Ame passengers te Havana for the 26 July celebra-
clons, ‘The other four flights ow am 35, ae 28 end 29 August «=
teansported ever 200 Latin ; ane to Bra: t Hovena, -
Some of the alresatit invelvad returned to cuba with : oun lier
peeeengers
on delagetes be the 26 July pair nan but others: bed

: Bree tang ewe fer longer porieda

sunbers of pienengere, Meany ef the 200 Latin Ag

i through Brazil wae vara designed to help
concea othe. ‘face Porn clare angina

two Costa Ricans wers among the passengers on a
eharcered Cubana plane which wig turned back to Bavena at Grand
be ae i Jely 1903. Ohe was los Merine Bernendes Salazar,
y Costa Rica wonen known to have been sent to Cuba for
- training a8 @ guerville warfare instructor, She had been ia
Guba @ince September 1962. The orher Coeta Rican passenger was
Cavles Gullien, former head of the Costa Rican Seelety of
Feiends of the * cuban Revolution, whi had been in Cuba since
November 1962,

fo.

"The GIA Seation fa  fuito reports shat the i Lieary
Sums whieh seouned p:

HW 50955 DocId:32424014 Page 20



--- Page 21 ---
é ‘chee ef Celera dubentetves in. paontvon at Tease for the
eaent: bare been great y dubibited by the maes arveste of
ete end by the outinwiag of the Commmiee

tt is reperted that the Kouduran Commmdet Party has
issued orders te ive: mot fo attéepe to teevel to Cubs
ee the prone ow, This action Le apparently the result of
the sing vigdlance of the Honduran government and the

ee ties ef sericcer travel controls,

Aetonding to Gn uoeoniiveed report weealwed tn duly,
a Buea of lgsgnirns of Pring bergrened Par ef Guatenale ia
sy and de to be

end 4 print pabletins “tor ‘distribution ey wadie
may eslleace 3 oh 2 een e nse a

‘it was reliably reported that ta mid-Suly 1963, a
sehl eedetal freeigheer Landed 14 large bomes of of Communit

propagends on the northern esget. of Honduras, the boxes having
been. evensfarrad ot. cea trem 42 lager vessel.

wenlet mabers of the Peronlet Party, « pperently,
gatetehip of uch figured aa Hector Villolon and

| Cooke, ate apparently receiving encouragement and
promises of lerge sume of money from Cube ia support ef theis
efforts to train and orgenive subversive groups in Argentina.

HW 50955 Docld:32424014 Page 21

ve neEDe by shorteaye:



--- Page 22 ---
ah

Yilialon bas stated that hie ples calls for expanding and

aecellesuting subversive activities in Argentine culuinating

in @ complete take over within two.years, There is no indica-

tion thet Peron himself hes agreed to thie plen, Tt hao been

weparted thet lesdere of the Communist Party of Argentine have

bean greatly annoyed by the tendency of the Castro regime te
support the vevelutionary Peronists without having consulted.
the Coumuniet Party of Argentina.

fe 40 weported that the so-called Army of National
Liberation (ANE) of Argentina, which is a reletively suail
Cagtxvelst ovgemization divected from Cuba by John WElilam Cooke,
hao im recent weeke been negotiating fer the purchase of arns
end has been offered aubeechine gues, tbazdokaa and ether weapone
by tuo or three private suppliers. If was reported, however,
that the ANL was having difflewity geting enough deliars frou
Cuba te sake slenifleant purchases pecetble.

Bolivie

The Bolivian Minletry of Foret ga Relations on 23
Augiet protested formally te the Cuben Chargs @Afisices ia
La Poe againet the Cuboa Eubasey support to the miners ducing
the recent crisis, Subsequently, bowever, Foreign Minister
Fellman informed the Cuben Chargé chat he need uot fear that
the Goverment of Bolivia would break diplematie veiations with
Guba, There hag, in fact, been ao hard information Haking the
Cuban Enbasay with the present wining crisis ia apite af ome
unconfismad reports of Cuban support.

Gaben Ambassador to Braatt, Esul Rea Hourl, ie soported
te have attempted to encourage peasant | league leader Francisco
auties te geyitelize the leagues in northern Brawil, According

te geme foports effarte axe being ‘wade te unify the leadership
‘and bring dissident elemente under the genetel divection of
Juliso. Other vepette indicate thet, although the Guben Embassy
is pravidiag suidasce and possibly flmenelial support te the
movement, it bad not yet resolved the internal dissension in
the lnagues.

HW 50955 DocId:32424014 Page 22



--- Page 23 ---
Yeom Colowbia reporta have bean received of inereasing
Guban agsiatence, privarily im the form of training courses by
fastructors whe have been trained in Cuba, to tha Worker-Student-
Peasant Movement (MOEC). A emall guerrilla band encountered
by the Colombian ary ia July 1963 was broken wp when five
members Of the band were killed and two others captured, A
small quantity of arms and « considerable amount of beoks and
panphiets.on revolutionary warfare, photographs of Bidel Castro,
tentio Clenfuegos and Hae Tse-tung, and bulletins of the MORC
were found at the eamp atte, Recent reports have indlested an
increase in the terrerigt efforts of the MOE and inereaged
promises of agpistance from Che Guevara with regard to the
training of additional NOEC monbers,

&o i Be

ia mid-July an ineweased number of guerrilias were

reportedly being trained im Costa Rica by Adolfo Gareia Barberenn,
‘well-knowm Micareguan xevolutienary leader and member ef the

FL (ational Liberation Front ~~ Coumunist-dominated, Cuban
Supported, anth-Moaragua revolutionary group). In early

August, Alberts Serrats, leader of the FLN in Costa Rica, lege
with @ group of Micawaguans for the Coat Ricen-Nicaraguan

border, The purchase of arms end supplies and the meoruitment
ef Mieeraguans for a movement againgt Nlearagua are ales reportedly
wnderuay in Costa Rice,

_ Hisctor Bogantes Zamora, Costa Rican egitator, left Sen Jose
in mid-August for the Meas berder to supervise the passage
ef Mieevaguan guercillas from Costa Blea into Mieeragua.
Bogentes, who recently veturned from attending the May Bay
celebrations in Cuba, was assigned this sesponaibiiity by the
Costa Bicén Commuheee Parcy,

Honduras.

The Honduran aimed forees begen te move against a group
of pro-Cagtea guerrillas operating ageinst tha Nicaraguan Sovern-
ment and active in the viciuity of the Mcaraguan-tic mivean border,
The Nicaraguan National Guard has been conducting operations
on its side ef the border against the insurgents since July.

The dease jungle and difficult terzain, however, will impede the
eSferts of beth foreas to eliminate the guerrl lias,

HW 50955 DocId:32424014 Page 23



--- Page 24 ---
a 5e

Information on the guereiile force ie seanty end

‘gonflieting. In is apparently eampoged of members of the Netioenal

Liberation Front (FL), a Commuiet-denimeated and Cubon-supported
revolutionary orgawieation active primarily ia Hesdures oad
Hicereges gince the fall of 1962, The strength ef the force

ae aot known,

Bicaragua

A captured guerrilia of the FL (National Liberation
Prone « ¢ Commeiiat-dominated, Cuban-supportad, enti-Nicaraguan
gmup) confessed that he was a member of a geeup of 46 who
entered Wicarague from Bondures on 22 July. He eald the¢ their
miasion wae ta establish a baee camp in the Isabella mountaine,
Department of Jimetegs, in order to indoctrainate the pessante
and te train them in guersilla tectics. He admitted that he _
hed received eis months’ guerrilla warfare trataing in Ciba and
that other PLY leaders hed received similar tweining. He aleo
seid that the PLM training caup in Honduras wae near B1 Lagarte,
on the Patues Biver.

_ in British Gulans, Colane Inport-Export Corporation
(Gimpex) received a one wd iden dollar advance payment deposiced
by the Cuban Alimpex Corporation for goods te be delivered to
Cubs da the future, Gimpox has, iu turn, leaned thie money te
the Government of British Guiana. Cheddi Jagan"s People’s

uit ae ie

Pregresaive Party is the major ateckholder in Gimpex. i

PRES

Kassin, Nantgex of Gimpex, has indicated that Cimpex will be
able to eeeuve additiensl leans from Cube in amounts suffielent
to tide the Jagan goverment over any foreseeable exisis. It
was also reported thet Clupex plans to buy elxeraft, spare parte
and other meehkinery ia the twlted Stetes for veshipment to Cubs,

Senexal

&

1 tanees where such funds heve been confiscated by tha police
have eceurved recently in El Selvader, Pangea and Ecuador.

HW 50955 Docld:32424014 Page 24


